
== The Conditionality of Life

By _Nina van Gorkom_

Why do we do what we do? why do we see what we see? Seeing, attachment,
generosity, all experiences in life can arise only because of a concurrence of
conditions. This book is an introduction to the seventh book of the Abhidhamma,
that deals with the conditionality of life. It explains the deep underlying
motives for all actions through body, speech and mind and shows that these are
dependent on conditions and cannot be controlled by a ‘self’. The study of
conditions is indispensable for understanding the teaching of the ‘Dependent
Origination’, the factors that condition our being in the cycle of birth and
death. It will help the reader to understand the meaning of the Buddha’s
teaching of non-self, which can lead to the eradication of wrong view and
liberation from the cycle of birth and death. This book that deals with the
intricacy of conditions is suitable for those who have already made a study of
the Buddha’s teachings. 

Why do we do what we do? Why do we see what
we see? Seeing, attachment, generosity, all experiences in life can arise only
because of a concurrence of conditions. This book is an introduction to the
seventh book of the Abhidhamma, that deals with the conditionality of life. It
explains the deep underlying motives for all actions through body, speech and
mind and shows that these are dependent on conditions and cannot be controlled
by a ‘self’. The study of conditions is indispensable for understanding the
teaching of the ‘Dependent Origination’ and the meaning of the Buddha’s teaching
of non-self. This book is suitable for those who have already made a study of
the Buddha’s teachings. 

Price UK £10. Published 2010. 9.25in x 7.5in, 144 pages.
