\input texinfo
@c $Id: cond.texi,v 1.35 2010/07/18 15:11:01 alan Exp alan $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename conditions.info
@settitle The Conditionality of Life
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c @smallbook
@c %**end of header 
@c @fonttextsize 10
@copying
 First edition published in 2010 by @*
 Zolag @*
 32 Woodnook Road @*
 Streatham @*
 London @*
 SW16 6TZ @*
 www.zolag.co.uk @*



ISBN 978-1-897633-26-7 @*
@copyright{Nina van Gorkom} @*
 All rights reserved @*
 British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data @*
 A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library @*
 Printed in the UK and USA by Lightningsource. @*
$Id: cond.texi,v 1.35 2010/07/18 15:11:01 alan Exp alan $
@end copying
@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@sp 5
@center @titlefont{The Conditionality of Life}
@sp 2
@center An Outline of the Twenty-Four Conditions as taught in the Abhidhamma
@sp 2
@center by @i{Nina van Gorkom} 
@sp 10
@center @sc{Zolag}
@center 2010
@c The following two commands
@c start the copyright page.
@page

@insertcopying


@end titlepage

@ifnothtml
@contents
@end ifnothtml

@ifnottex
@node top
@top The Conditionality of Life
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction: Introduction
* Preface: Preface
* Root-Condition: Root-Condition
* Object-Condition: Object-Condition
* Predominance-Condition: Predominance-Condition
* Proximity and Contiguity-Condition: Proximity and Contiguity-Condition
* Conascence and Mutuality-Condition: Conascence and Mutuality-Condition
* Dependence-Condition: Dependence-Condition
* Decisive Support-Condition (Part I): Decisive Support-Condition (Part I)
* Decisive Support-Condition (Part II): Decisive Support-Condition (Part II)
* Prenascence and Postnascence-Condition: Prenascence and Postnascence-Condition 
* Repetition-Condition: Repetition-Condition 
* Kamma and Vipāka-Condition: Kamma and Vipāka-Condition
* Nutriment-Condition: Nutriment-Condition
* Faculty-Condition: Faculty-Condition
* Jhāna-Condition: Jhāna-Condition
* Path-Condition: Path-Condition
* Three Pairs of Conditions: Three Pairs of Conditions
* Aspects of the Twenty-Four Conditions: Aspects of the Twenty-Four Conditions
* Appendix 1: Appendix 1
* Appendix 2: Appendix 2
* Appendix 3: Appendix 3
* Glossary: Glossary
@end menu

@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface

The Buddha's teaching on the conditions for the phenomena of our life to
arise has been laid down in the last of the seven books of the
Abhidhamma, the ``Paṭṭhāna'', or ``Conditional Relations''. The Buddha, in
the night he attained enlightenment, penetrated all the different
conditions for the phenomena which arise and he contemplated the
``Dependant Origination'' (Paticca Samuppāda), the conditions for being
in the cycle of birth and death, and the way leading to the elimination
of these causes. We read in the Introduction of the ``Atthasālinī'' (The
Expositor, the Commentary to the Dhammasangaṇi, the first book of the
Abhidhamma) that the Buddha, during the fourth week after his
enlightenment, sat in the ``Jewel House'', in the north west direction,
and contemplated the Abhidhamma. The Abhidhamma was laid down later on
in seven books. We read:


@quotation
@dots{}And while he contemplated the contents of the ``Dham@-masangaṇi'', his body
did not emit rays; and similarly with the contemplation of the next
five books. But when, coming to the ``Great Book'', he began to
contemplate the twenty-four universal causal relations of condition, of
presentation, and so on, his omniscience certainly found its
opportunity therein. For as the great fish Timirati-piṅgala finds room
only in the great ocean eighty-four thousand yojanas in depth, so his
omniscience truly finds room only in the Great Book. Rays of six
colours-indigo, golden, red, white, tawny, and dazzling-issued from
the Teacher's body, as he was contemplating the subtle and abstruse
Dhamma by his omniscience which had found such opportunity @enddots{}

@end quotation


The teaching of the conditional relations is deep and it is not easy to
read the ``Paṭṭhāna'', but we could at least begin to study different
conditions and verify them in daily life. Before we knew the Buddha's
teachings we used to think of cause and effect in a speculative way. We
may have reflected on the origin of life, on the origin of the world,
we may have thought about causes and effects with regard to the events
of life, but we did not penetrate the real conditions for the phenomena
of life. The Buddha taught the way to develop understanding of what is
true in the absolute or ultimate sense. We cannot understand the
``Paṭṭhāna'' if we do not know the difference between what is real in
conventional sense and what is real in the ultimate sense. Body and
mind are real in conventional sense, they are not real in the ultimate
sense. What we call body and mind are temporary combinations of
different realities which arise because of conditioning factors and
then fall away immediately. They are succeeded by new realities which
fall away again, and thus life goes on. Body, mind, person or being do
not exist in the ultimate sense. Mental phenomena, nāma, and physical
phenomena, rūpa, are real in the ultimate sense, but they are merely
passing phenomena. Ultimate truth is not abstract. Ultimate realities,
in Pāli: paramattha dhammas, have each their own characteristic which
cannot be changed. We may change the name, but the characteristic
remains the same. Seeing is an ultimate reality, it experiences visible
object which appears through the eyes; it is real for everyone, it has
its own unalterable characteristic. Anger has its own characteristic,
it is real for everyone, no matter how we name it. Ultimate realities
can be directly experienced when they appear through eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, bodysense or mind. They arise because of their appropriate
conditions. 

There are twenty-four classes of conditions enumerated in the ``Paṭṭhāna''.
In order to understand these it is essential to have a precise
knowledge of the realities to which these conditional relations
pertain. The ``Dhammasangaṇi'', the first book of the Abhidhamma, is an
analytical exposition of all classes of consciousness, cittas, and
their accompanying mental factors, cetasikas, and all physical
phenomena, rūpas. The Dhammasangaṇi explains which cetasikas accompany
which cittas @footnote{There is only one citta at a time but it is
accompanied by several cetasikas which each perform their own function.}. It explains which rūpas arise together in a group and the factors
which produce rūpas, namely, kamma, citta, nutrition and temperature.
However, it does not describe in detail the different types of
conditions. The Paṭṭhāna describes in detail all possible relations
between phenomena. Each reality in our life can only occur because of a
concurrence of different conditions which operate in a very intricate
way. Hearing is conditioned by sound which impinges on the earsense.
Both sound and earsense are rūpas which also arise because of their own
conditions and fall away. Thus, hearing, the reality which they
condition, cannot last either; it also has to fall away. Each
conditioned reality can exist just for an extremely short moment. When
we understand this it will be easier to see that there is no self who
can exert control over realities. How could we control what falls away
immediately? When we move our hands, when we walk, when we laugh or
cry, when we are attached or worried, there are conditions for such
moments. The Paṭṭhāna helps us to understand the deep underlying
motives for our behaviour and the conditions for our defilements. It
explains, for example, that kusala, wholesomeness, can be the object of
akusala citta, unwholesome citta. For instance, on account of
generosity which is wholesome, attachment, wrong view or conceit, which
are unwholesome realities, can arise. The Paṭṭhāna also explains that
akusala can be the object of kusala, for example, when akusala is
considered with insight. This is an essential point which is often
overlooked. If one thinks that akusala cannot be object of awareness
and right understanding, the right Path cannot be developed. 

The enumerations and classifications in the Paṭṭhāna may, at first
sight, seem dry and cumbersome, but when they are carefully considered
it can be seen that they deal with realities of daily life. The study
of the Abhidhamma can become very lively and interesting if our
knowledge is applied in our own situation. It can be understood more
clearly that kusala citta and akusala citta arise because of different
conditions. One may doubt whether it is helpful to know details about
realities and their conditions. It is beneficial to have less ignorance
about ourselves. Defilements cannot be eradicated immediately, there
will still be sadness, worry and frustration. However, when it is more
clearly understood that realities arise because of their own conditions
there will be less inclination to try to do what is impossible: to
change and to control what has arisen because of conditions. When there
is more understanding one will be less obsessed by one's experiences,
there will be more patience. The Paṭṭhāna clarifies how the arising of
kusala and akusala at the present are conditions for the arising of
kusala and akusala in the future. Each citta that arises and falls away
is succeeded immediately by a following citta and therefore wholesome
and unwholesome inclinations can be accumulated from moment to moment.
Understanding that arises now falls away, but it is accumulated and
thus, it can grow. It can develop to direct understanding of realities
and it can eventually lead to enlightenment. The study of the Paṭṭhāna
can encourage us to develop understanding together with all good
qualities.

The reader will find it complicated to study the duration of rūpa which
equals seventeen moments of citta. We could never count such moments,
they pass too quickly. However, the knowledge about the duration of
rūpa helps us to see that rūpa lasts longer than citta. Rūpa is weak at
its arising moment, but after its arising it can condition citta. One
rūpa can condition several cittas since it lasts longer than citta. For
instance, the rūpa which is sense object (colour, sound, etc.) can
condition a series of cittas arising in a sense-door process by way of
object-condition, that is to say, by being the object they experience.
The rūpas which are the sense-organs (eyesense, earsense, etc.) can
condition citta by being its base, the place of origin. Thus, knowing
about the duration of rūpa and of citta clarifies their relationship.

The Abhidhamma, the Suttanta and the Vinaya all point to the same goal:
the eradication of wrong view and all other defilements. When we study
the Paṭṭhāna we are reminded of this goal. Some people doubt whether
the Buddha himself taught the twenty-four classes of conditions. They
wonder why these have not been enumerated in the suttas. The nucleus of
the teaching on conditions is to be found also in other parts of the
teachings. In the suttas we read, for example, about jhāna-factors and
Path-factors, and about the factors which are predominance-condition
@footnote{Later on I shall deal with these kinds of conditions.} for
the realities they accompany, and these are among the twenty-four
classes of conditions which are described in the Paṭṭhāna. The
``Dependant Origination'' (Paṭiccasamuppāda), the Buddha's teaching on
the factors which are the conditions for being in the cycle of birth
and death and also those which condition freedom from the cycle, is
found in all parts of the scriptures. The teaching of the ``Dependant
Origination'' is closely connected with the teaching of the ``Paṭṭhāna'',
and the ``Dependant Origination'' cannot be understood without knowledge
of the different types of conditions as taught in the ``Paṭṭhāna''. Doubt
will only disappear if we thoroughly consider the different types of
conditions, because then we can see for ourselves whether the contents
of the ``Paṭṭhāna'' conform to the truth or not. 

The twenty-four conditions have also been explained by the great
commentator Buddhaghosa in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (Path of Purification
@footnote{I have used the translation by Ven. Ñyāṇamoli, Colombo,
1964.}). Buddhaghosa, who lived in the beginning of the fifth century
A.D. in Sri Lanka, edited older commentarial texts he found there. 

I have used Pāli terms next to the English translation of these terms
for precision. In different English textbooks one and the same Pāli
term has been translated with different English words, and hence there
may be confusion as to which reality is represented by such or such
English word. Only part of the ``Paṭṭhāna'' has been translated into
English by Ven. U Narada. This work, consisting of two volumes, is,
under the title of ``Conditional Relations'', available at the Pāli Text
Society. The ``Guide to Conditional Relations'', which the translator
also wrote, is a helpful introduction to the reading of the ``Paṭṭhāna''
@footnote{See also ``Guide to the Abhidhamma Piṭaka'', Ch VII, by Ven.
Nyanatiloka, B.P.S. Kandy, and ``The Buddhist Philosophy of Relations'',
by Ven. Ledi Sayadaw, Department of Religious Affairs, Rangoon,
Myanmar.}. All the texts from which I quoted are available at the Pāli
Text Society. 
In Thailand, Ms. Sujin Boriharnwanaket is teaching and explaining the
Dhamma in lectures, radio programs and meetings. In the Bovoranives
Temple in Bangkok, she gave most inspiring lectures on the conditional
relations. She stressed time and again that conditions pertain to this
very moment, in daily life. I used many of her lively illustrations and
her quotations from the scriptures for this book on conditions.

I have added an appendix where I explain some notions of the Abhidhamma
in order to facilitate the reading of this study on conditions.

It has been said in commentaries that Buddhism will decline and that the
Buddhist scriptures will disappear. The Abhidhamma, and in particular
the ``Paṭṭhāna'', will be the first to be lost. The ``Paṭṭhāna'' is deep
and difficult to understand. I hope I can contribute with this book to
the arousing of interest in the ``Paṭṭhāna''. May the Abhidhamma survive
for an additional length of time. This would also insure the survival
of the other parts of the scriptures, the Vinaya and the Suttanta. 

Theoretical knowledge of conditions is not the purpose of the
``Paṭṭhāna''. Conditions cannot be thoroughly grasped through mere
intellectual understanding. The ``Paṭṭhāna'' helps us to have more
understanding of the truth of non-self. It thereby encourages us to
develop the eightfold Path, to develop direct understanding of all
realities which appear through the five sense-doors and through the
mind-door. When understanding of nāma, mental phenomena, and rūpa,
physical phenomena, has been developed to the degree of the second
stage of insight @footnote{Insight, direct understanding of nāma and
rūpa, is developed in several stages, until realities are seen as they
are at the attainment of enlightenment. The second stage cannot be
realised before the first stage: knowing the difference between the
characteristic of nāma and of rūpa.}, the conditionality of realities
will be directly understood. When conditions are understood more
clearly, we shall be less inclined to cling to a self who could control
awareness of nāma and rūpa. Thus, the ``Paṭṭhāna'' can help us to follow
the right practice. It is above all the right practice of the eightfold
Path that can promote the survival of the Buddha's teachings.





@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction



It is not by mere chance that we are born in planes of existence where
we can experience objects through the senses and that we are equipped
with sense-organs through which we can experience such objects. During
previous lives as well we experienced colour, sound and other
sense-objects. We were clinging to these objects in the past and we are
clinging to them at present again and again, so that attachment has
become a deeprooted tendency. Attachment does not arise with each
moment of consciousness, citta, but the tendency to attachment is
``carried on'' from one moment to the next moment, from life to life.
Each citta which arises falls away completely, but it is succeeded by
the next citta. In the uninterrupted series of cittas which are
succeeding one another continuously, inclinations to both good and evil
are carried on. 

We all have accumulated attachment. For instance, as soon as a morsel of
delicious food is on our tongue, attachment to flavour has an
opportunity to arise. In the human plane of existence there are many
opportunities for attachment to sense-objects. There were wise people,
also before the Buddha's time, who saw the disadvantage of the
experience of sense-objects. They cultivated tranquil meditation to the
stage of absorption, jhāna, in order to temporarily suppress the
clinging to sense-objects. Jhānacittas of the different stages of jhāna
can produce results in the form of rebirth in higher planes of
existence where there are less sense impressions or none at all. In
these planes one does not have to take food in order to stay alive,
there are no conditions for the enjoyment of flavours. Through the
cultivation of jhāna, however, clinging is not eradicated. So long as
clinging has not been eradicated rebirth will occur. When the lifespan
in a higher plane is terminated one may be reborn in a plane where one
will cling again to sense-objects and accumulate more clinging, unless
one develops the wisdom which can eradicate clinging. 

The fact that we are born in the human plane where we can enjoy flavours
and all the other sense-objects and also the fact that we have clinging
to them is conditioned. When we use the word ``condition'' we should
realize that there is not just one kind of condition which brings about
one kind of effect. There are many types of conditions for the
phenomena which arise and it is important to study these different
types. We may be inclined to put off the study of this subject because
we think it too difficult. However, we should remember that conditions
are real in daily life and that they are not merely textbook terms. 

We may have learnt that there are different types of mental phenomena,
nāmas, and different types of physical phenomena, rūpas, and that these
are only conditioned phenomena. If we study the conditions for the
arising of nāma and rūpa we shall have more understanding of the
meaning of ``no self''. The study of the teachings and consideration of
what one has learnt are important conditions for the arising of sati,
awareness, and direct understanding of realities and this will
eventually lead to the eradication of the wrong view of self.

 Awareness or mindfulness, sati, is a sobhana cetasika, beautiful mental
factor, which arises with each wholesome citta. Sati is non-forgetful of
what is wholesome, and there are many levels of sati. Sati in the development
of insight, vipassanā, is directly aware of the nāma or rūpa which appears. 

What we take for our life is actually conditioned phenomena (saṅkhāra
dhammas), that is, citta (consciousness), cetasikas (mental factors
accompanying citta), and rūpa (physical phenomena). What arises because
of conditions does not last, it has to fall away again. Thus, citta,
cetasika and rūpa are impermanent. Nibbāna is the unconditioned dhamma,
it does not arise and it does not fall away. 

Citta experiences something, it cognizes an object. The five senses and
the mind are the doorways through which citta can cognize the different
objects which present themselves. Citta does not arise singly, it is
always accompanied by cetasikas. Cetasikas have each their own function
and assist citta in cognizing an object. There are many ways of
classifying cittas and one of these is by way of four ``jātis'' or
classes (jāti literally means birth or nature). There are four jātis by
which the different nature of cittas is shown and they are:



@itemize @minus 

@item
kusala (wholesome)

@item
akusala (unwholesome)

@item
vipāka (result which may be pleasant or unpleasant)

@item
kiriya (neither cause nor result, inoperative)

@end itemize



Cetasikas are of the same jāti as the citta they accompany. There are
seven cetasikas, the ``universals'' (sabba-citta-sādhārana) which
accompany every citta @footnote{They are contact, feeling, remembrance
or perception (sañnñnā), volition, concentration, life faculty and
attention.}. There are six cetasikas, the ``particulars'' (pakiṇṇakā)
which arise with cittas of the four jātis but not with every citta
@footnote{They are: initial thinking, sustained thinking, decision,
effort, rapture and wish-to-do.}. Furthermore, there are akusala
cetasikas which arise only with akusala cittas and there are sobhana
(beautiful) cetasikas which arise only with sobhana cittas. Citta and
the accompanying cetasikas, in the planes of existence where there are
nāma and rūpa, arise at the same physical base (vatthu) @footnote{In
the planes of existence where there are nāma and rūpa, cittas do not
arise independently of the body, they have a physical base or place of
origin, vatthu, which is rūpa. For example, the rūpa which is eyesense
is the base for seeing-consciousness, and the other senses are the
bases for the relevant sense-cognitions.}, they experience the same
object and they fall away together. Citta and cetasikas are of the same
plane of consciousness @footnote{Plane of existence refers to the
place where one is born, such as the human plane, a hell plane or a
heavenly plane. Plane of consciousness refers to the nature of citta,
namely cittas of the sense sphere which experience sense objects,
jhānacittas which experience with absorption meditation subjects or
lokuttara cittas which experience nibbāna, the unconditioned dhamma.}:
they can be of the sense-sphere, they can be jhānacitta which is
rūpāvacara or arūpāvacara, or they can be lokuttara (supramundane),
experiencing nibbāna. Citta and cetasikas condition one another in
several ways, as we shall see.

Rūpas, physical phenomena, do not arise singly, but in groups, which can
be produced by kamma, by citta, by heat or by nutrition @footnote{Different groups of rūpas of the body are produced by one these four
factors, and rūpas which are not of the body are produced only by
temperature.}. Thus we see that there is no reality which arises
singly. Realities do not arise by their own power, they are dependant
on other phenomena which make them arise. Moreover, no reality arises
from a single cause, there is a concurrence of several conditions for
realities to arise. When we, for example, taste delicious cheese, there
are several conditions for tasting-consciousness. Tasting-consciousness
is vipākacitta, result, produced by kamma. It is also conditioned by
the rūpa which is tastingsense, produced by kamma as well. Tastingsense
is the physical place of origin or base (vatthu) for
tasting-consciousness as well as the doorway (dvara) through which
tasting-consciousness experiences the flavour. The rūpa which is
flavour is a condition for tasting-consciousness by being its object.
Contact, phassa, which is a cetasika accompanying every citta,
``contacts'' the flavour so that tasting-consciousness can experience it.
Without phassa citta could not experience any object. 

If we understand that each reality depends on a multiplicity of
conditions we shall be less inclined to think that pain and pleasure
can be controlled by a self. There are many moments of pleasure and
pain, each brought about by their own conditions. When we study the
conditions for the phenomena which arise, we shall better understand
that there is no self which has any power over them. 

Nāma conditions rūpa and rūpa conditions nāma. We read in the
``Visuddhimagga'' (XVIII, 32) about the interdependence of nāma and rūpa:


@sp 1


@quotation

``@dots{}For just as when two sheaves of reeds are propped up one against the
other, each one gives the other consolidating support, and when one
falls the other falls, so too, in the five-constituent becoming (in the
plane of the five khandhas @footnote{The conditioned phenomena of our
life can be classified as five khandhas or aggregates: rūpa-kkhandha,
vedanā-kkhandha (feeling), saññā-kkhandha (perception or remembrance),
saṅkhāra-kkhandha (formations, all cetasikas except feeling and
perception), and viññāṇa-kkhandha (consciousness).}),
mentality-materiality occurs as an interdependent state, each of its
components giving the other consolidating support, and when one falls
owing to death, the other falls too. Hence the Ancients said:
@sp 1
The mental and material @*
Are twins and each supports the other; @*
When one breaks up they both break up @*
Through interconditionality.
@sp 1
And just as when sound occurs having as its support a drum that is
beaten by the stick, then the drum is one and the sound is another, the
drum and the sound are not mixed up together, the drum is void of the
sound and the sound is void of the drum, so too, when mentality occurs
having as its support the materiality called the physical base, the
door and the object, then the materiality is one and the mentality is
another, the mentality and the materiality are not mixed up together,
the mentality is void of the materiality and the materiality is void of
the mentality; yet the mentality occurs due to the materiality as the
sound occurs due to the drum@enddots{}''

@end quotation
@sp 1

In being mindful of nāma and rūpa we shall learn to distinguish their
different characteristics, thus, we shall not confuse nāma and rūpa and
know them as conditioned realities, not self. The ``Visuddhimagga''
(XVII, 68) defines condition, paccaya, as follows:

@quotation

``@dots{} When a state is indispensable to another state's presence or arising,
the former is a condition for the latter. But as to characteristic, a
condition has the characteristic of assisting; for any given state that
assists the presence or arising of a given state is called the latter's
condition. The words, condition, cause, reason, source, originator,
producer, etc., are one in meaning though different in letter@enddots{}''

@end quotation



Thus, there are conditioning phenomena, paccaya-dhammas, and conditioned
phenomena, paccayupanna-dhammas. 

In the ``Paṭṭhāna'' there is a tripartite division of realities, which can
also be found elsewhere in the Abhidhamma. Realities can be: kusala
(here translated as faultless), akusala (faulty) and avyākatā
(indeterminate), which comprises citta and cetasikas which are vipāka,
kiriyacittas, rūpa and nibbāna. 

The ``Paṭṭhāna'' deals with twenty-four classes of conditions and explains
in detail the phenomena which condition other phenomena by way of these
different conditions. One may wonder whether so many details are neces-
sary. 

We read in ``The Guide'' @footnote{An ancient guide for commentators,
from which also Buddhaghosa quoted. It is assumed that it came from
India to Sri Lanka, between the 3rd century B.C. and the 5th century
A.C.} (Netti-Pakaraṇaṁ, Part III, 16 Modes of Conveying, VII,
Knowledge of the Disposition of Creatures' Faculties, paragraph 587):


@quotation

``Herein, the Blessed One advises one of keen faculties with advice in
brief; the Blessed One advises one of medium faculties with advice in
brief and detail; the Blessed One advises one of blunt faculties with
advice in detail.''

@end quotation
 


The Buddha taught Dhamma in detail to those who could not grasp the
truth quickly. People today are different from people at the Buddha's
time who could attain enlightenment quickly, even during a discourse.
The ``Paṭṭhāna'' is not theory, it teaches the truth of conditioned
phenomena in our own life and this can be verified. If we merely learn
the theory of the different conditions we shall have the wrong grasp of
the Abhidhamma and this leads to mental derangement, to madness. We
read in the ``Expositor''(I, Introductory Discourse, 24):


@quotation

``@dots{}The bhikkhu, who is ill trained in the Abhidhamma, makes his mind run
to excess in metaphysical abstractions and thinks of the unthinkable.
Consequently he gets mental distraction@enddots{}''

@end quotation



We should keep in mind the purpose of the study of the conditions as
taught in the ``Paṭṭhāna.'' Each section illustrates the truth that what
we take for self are only conditioned phenomena. We keep on forgetting
the truth and thus we have to be reminded again and again.

 We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XX, 19) that the five khandhas
(conditioned nāmas and rūpas) are ``as a disease, because of having to
be maintained by conditions, and because of being the root of disease''.
The khandhas arise because of conditions and what arises because of a
concurrence of conditions is not eternal, it has to fall away.
Therefore, the khandhas cannot be a real refuge, they are dukkha,
unsatisfactory. Further on we read that they are a calamity, an
affliction, a plague, no protection, no shelter, as murderous, because
of breaking faith like an enemy posing as a friend.

We cling to the khandhas, we want them to arise again and again; we wish
life to continue. So long as we have not eradicated defilements, the
khan- dhas will continue to arise at birth. We perform kamma, good or
evil deeds, that can produce result in the form of future rebirth. We
still run the risk of an unhappy rebirth produced by akusala kamma
@footnote{Those who have attained one of the stages of enlightenment,
the ariyans, have no conditions for an unhappy rebirth.}. Kamma is
accumulated and thus it is capable of producing result later on. Not
only kamma, but also defilements are accumulated. Since there are many
more akusala cittas arising than kusala cittas, we accumulate
defilements again and again, and these cause sorrow. Akusala cittas
which arose in the past condition the arising of akusala cittas later
on, at present and in the future. The latent tendencies of akusala are
like microbes infesting the body and they can become active at any time
when the conditions are favorable. So long as the khandhas have not
been fully understood by insight defilements have soil to grow in; they
are not abandoned and thus the cycle of birth and death continues. In
order eventually fully to understand the khandhas we should learn what
the conditions are for the phenomena which arise. Therefore, it is
beneficial to study the twenty-four conditions which are treated in the
``Paṭṭhāna''.










@node Root-Condition

@chapter Root-Condition




The first condition mentioned in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' is root-condition,
hetu-paccaya. There are three akusala hetus: lobha, attachment, dosa,
aversion, and moha, ignorance, and these can have many degrees. Lobha
can be a slight attachment or it can be clinging, greed or
covetousness. Dosa can be a slight aversion, or it can be as intense as
anger or hatred. Moha is ignorance of realities, it is ignorance of
what is kusala or akusala, and ignorance of the four noble truths
@footnote{The truth of dukkha, suffering, of the origin of dukkha,
which is clinging, of the cessation of dukkha, which is nibbāna, and of
the Path leading to the cessation of dukkha.}. Moha is the root of all
that is akusala, it arises with each akusala citta. There are three
sobhana (beautiful) hetus: alobha, non-attachment or generosity, adosa,
non-aversion or kindness, and amoha, paññā or right understanding. The
three sobhana hetus can have many degrees, they can even be lokuttara
(supramundane), when they accompany lokuttara citta which experiences
nibbāna.

These six roots are actually cetasikas or mental factors which accompany
citta. They are called root, since they are the firm foundation of the
citta. Just as a tree rests on its roots and receives sap through the
roots in order to grow, evenso are the akusala cittas and sobhana
cittas dependent on the presence of the roots and they cannot occur in
their absence. Thus, the roots are powerful conditions for the cittas
which are rooted in them.

When akusala citta arises it is always rooted in moha, and it may have
in addition the root of lobha or of dosa. The twelve types of akusala
citta are classified according to hetu:

@itemize @minus
@item 
eight types are rooted in moha and lobha, and they are called 
lobha-mūla-cittas @footnote{Mūla also means root. Four types are
accompanied by somanassa, pleasant feeling, four types by wrong view,
four types are asaṅkhārika, not-induced or spontaneous, four types are
sasaṅkhārika, induced. Altogether there are eight types.},

@item
two types are rooted in moha and dosa, and they are called dosa-mūla-cittas @footnote{One type is not-induced and one type is induced.},

@item
two types are rooted only in moha, and they are called moha-mūla-cittas
@footnote{One is called accompanied by restlessness, uddhacca, and one
is accompanied by doubt, vicikicchā.}.
@end itemize


All cittas accompanied by sobhana hetus are called sobhana cittas. Not
only kusala citta, but also vipākacitta and kiriyacitta that are
accompanied by sobhana hetus are sobhana cittas. 

All sobhana cittas have to be rooted in alobha and adosa and they may or
may not be rooted in amoha or paññā as well. There are eight types of
mahā-kusala cittas (kusala cittas of the sense-sphere @footnote{Mahā
means great.}), eight types of mahā-vipākacittas and eight types of
mahā-kiriyacittas (of the arahat @footnote{The arahat does not have
akusala cittas nor kusala cittas, he does not perform kamma which
produces result. When he has sobhana cittas, cittas accompanied by
beautiful qualities, they are inoperative, mahā-kiriyacittas which do
not produce result.}). Of each of the three sets of eight types, four
types are accompanied by paññā and four types are not accompanied by
paññā, thus, accompanied by the two sobhana hetus of alobha and adosa
@footnote{Of each of the three sets of eight types, four types are
associated with paññā, four types are without paññā, four types are
accompanied by somanassa, pleasant feeling, four types are accompanied
by upekkhā, indifferent feeling. Four types are asaṅkhārika, not
induced, four types are sasaṅkhārika, induced.}. The sobhana hetus
that accompany these sobhana cittas condition them by way of
root-condition, hetu-paccaya. 

People who develop samatha, tranquil meditation, may have accumulated
skill for the attainment of jhāna, absorption. When there are the right
conditions jhānacittas arise. There are jhānacittas of different stages
of rūpa-jhāna, material jhāna, and arūpa-jhāna, immaterial jhāna
@footnote{The meditation subjects of rūpa-jhāna are dependant on
materiality, whereas those of arūpa-jhāna do not and thus, arūpa-jhāna
is more tranquil, more refined.}. The rūpa-jhānacittas (rūpāvacara
cittas) and the arūpa-jhānacittas (arūpāvacara cittas) always have the
three hetus of alobha, adosa and paññā, because absorption is not
possible without paññā.

Through the development of insight, vipassanā, right understanding of
realities gradually grows and when understanding has been developed to
the degree that enlightenment can be attained, lokuttara cittas which
experience nibbāna arise. Lokuttara cittas always have three hetus,
they are accompanied by alobha (non-attachment), adosa (non-aversion)
and paññā; these hetus are also lokuttara.

Not all cittas have hetus, there are also rootless cittas, ahetuka
cittas which may be vipākacittas (result) or kiriyacittas (neither
cause nor result, inoperative). When visible object impinges on the
eyesense, it is experienced by cittas arising in the eye-door
process@footnote{The objects which impinge on the six doors are
experienced by several cittas arising in a process, which each perform
their own function. Some of these cittas are ahetuka kiriyacitta, some
ahetuka vipākacitta, and some are accompanied by roots, namely the
javana-cittas which are either kusala cittas or akusala cittas. See
Appendix 1.}; it is experienced by seeing which is ahetuka
vipākacitta, and by other ahetuka cittas and subsequently by cittas
performing the function of javana (impulsion or ``running through the
object'') arise, and these are (in the case of non-arahats) kusala
cittas or akusala cittas and thus, with hetus. After the eye-door
process is over, visible object is experienced through the mind-door;
there is the mind-door adverting-consciousness which is ahetuka
kiriyacitta, to be followed by javana-cittas which are kusala cittas or
akusala cittas. 

Good deeds or bad deeds are performed during the moments of javana. Then
kamma is accumulated which can produce its result later on. One also
accumulates good and bad inclinations which condition the arising of
kusala citta or akusala citta in the future. When kusala javana-cittas
are accompanied by paññā which is right understanding of realities,
right understanding is accumulated. 

As we have seen in the classification of cittas rooted in sobhana hetus,
there are vipākacittas with hetus @footnote{Some vipākacittas are
ahetuka, rootless, such as seeing-consciousness or
hearing-consciousness, and some vipākacittas are accompanied by
roots.}. Kamma produces rebirth-consciousness, paṭisandhi-citta, which
is vipākacitta, and this vipākacitta, depending on the type and degree
of kamma which produces it, may be: ahetuka, or accompanied by two
roots, namely alobha and adosa, or accompanied by three roots, that is
to say, by paññā as well. The roots condition the citta and the
accompanying cetasikas by way of root-condition. All bhavanga-cittas
(life-continuum @footnote{Bhavanga-cittas arise in between the
processes of cittas, they preserve the continuity in the life of a
being. They do not experience the objects which impinge on the senses
and the mind, they experience their own object, which is the same as
the object experienced by the rebirth-consciousness. See my ``Abhidhamma
in Daily Life'', Ch 12.}) and the cuti-citta (dying-consciousness) are
of the same type of vipākacitta as the paṭisandhi-citta. 

It is important to know which type of citta arises at the present
moment. Is it with roots or is it rootless? Is it akusala citta or
kusala citta? Cittas rooted in lobha are bound to arise time and again,
since lobha has been accumulated for aeons. The first javana-cittas of
every living being are lobha-mūla-cittas; clinging is deeply rooted.
One clings to all kinds of objects which present themselves through the
six doors and clinging is extremely hard to eradicate. We read in the
``Gradual Sayings'' (Book of the Twos, Ch XI, paragraph1):


@quotation

``Monks, there are these two longings hard to abandon. What two?

The longing for gain and the longing for life. These are the two.''

@end quotation


Time and again we want to gain something for ourselves. When we get up
in the morning and we eat breakfast we are clinging to coffee or tea,
but we do not notice that there are the hetus of moha and lobha which
condition the citta by way of root-condition. We cling to seeing or to
visible object, but we do not notice it, we are so used to clinging. We
have longing for life, we want to go on living and experiencing sense
objects. That is why there are conditions for rebirth again and again.
It is impossible for us not to have longing for life, only the arahat
has eradicated it.

We would like to have kusala citta more often, but it cannot arise
without the hetus which are alobha and adosa. Without these hetus we
cannot perform any wholesome deed, we cannot speak with kindness and
generosity. When amoha or paññā does not accompany the kusala citta,
right understanding of realities cannot be developed. There is no self
who can control hetu-paccaya, root-condition; akusala hetus and sobhana
hetus are anattā.




The roots, hetus, are the dhammas which condition the citta and
cetasikas they accompany and also the rūpa which is produced by the
citta at that moment. For instance, lobha-mūla-citta, citta rooted in
attachment, has two hetus: lobha, attachment, and moha, ignorance.
Lobha and moha condition the citta and its accompanying cetasikas by
way of root-condition. Moreover, rūpa produced by lobha-mūla-citta is
also conditioned by the roots of lobha and moha. In the case of
root-condition, the hetus which are the conditioning factors (the
paccayas) and the dhammas they condition (the paccayupanna dhammas)
arise simultaneously. The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Analytical Exposition, II, 1)
gives the following definition of root-condition:


@quotation

``The roots are related to the states @footnote{``States''stands for
dhammas, realities; ``states which are associated with roots'' are the
realities which arise together with the roots, namely, citta and
cetasikas.} which are associated with roots, and the rūpa produced
thereby, by root-condition.''

@end quotation



Citta is one of the four factors which can produce rūpas, the others
being kamma, temperature (utu) and nutrition (āhāra). Citta can produce
the groups of rūpa consisting of the eight inseparable rūpas which are:
solidity, cohesion, temperature, motion, colour, odour, flavour and
nutritive essence @footnote{Rūpas arise and fall away in groups or
units, and these consist of at least eight rūpas, which are called the
inseparable rūpas. Some groups of rūpas consist of more than eight
rūpas, but the eight inseparables always have to be present.}. 

Citta produces the two kinds of intimation, namely: bodily intimation
(kāya-viññatti), gestures, movements of the body and facial movements
by which we express our intentions, and speech intimation
(vacī-viññatti). Citta is assisted by the accompanying cetasikas when
it produces rūpa.

When we are angry and we show this by our facial expression, akusala
citta produces the rūpa which is bodily intimation, conditioned by the
hetus which are moha and dosa by way of root-condition. We may raise
our hand and hit someone else. Then akusala kamma through the body is
being performed and the rūpas are conditioned by root-condition. When
we flatter someone else in order to be liked by him we speak with
lobha-mūla-citta. Then the rūpa which is speech-intimation is
conditioned by moha and lobha by way of root-condition. Or we may
commit akusala kamma through speech, for example, when we are lying.
Lying may be done with lobha-mūla-citta when we want to gain something,
or with dosa-mūla-citta when we want to harm someone else. The rūpa
which is speech intimation is then conditioned by the accompanying
roots by way of root-condition.

When we clean the house or when we cook, do we realize by which hetus
our bodily movements are conditioned? There can be awareness at such
moments. We may write a letter to someone else with kindness, mettā,
and then the rūpas which arise while we move our hands are produced by
kusala citta. The accompanying sobhana hetus condition these rūpas by
way of root-condition. However, there are likely to be akusala cittas
arising alternately with kusala cittas. There may be right
understanding of nāma and rūpa while we write and then the citta is
accompanied by alobha, adosa and amoha. 

The rebirth-consciousness is vipākacitta, the result of kamma, a deed
committed in the past. The rebirth-consciousness may be ahetuka
(rootless) and in that case one is born handicapped @footnote{The
kusala kamma which produces a paṭisandhi-citta which is kusala vipāka
without roots is weaker than the kusala kamma which produces a
paṭisandhi-citta with two roots or three roots. There are many
different kammas with different degrees which produce their results
accordingly.}. Or the paṭisandhi-citta may be accompanied by two or
three sobhana hetus, depending on the degree of kusala kamma which
produces it. These hetus are of different degrees. When the
paṭisandhi-citta is rooted in sobhana hetus, these hetus condition the
citta, the accompanying cetasikas and the rūpas which are produced by
kamma and which arise at the same time as the paṭisandhi-citta. 

The paṭisandhi-citta cannot produce rūpa, but, in the planes where there
are nāma and rūpa, the five khandha planes, the rūpas arising at the
moment of birth are produced by kamma. Thus, both the paṭisandhi-citta
and the rūpas which arise at the same moment are result of kamma, a
deed previously done. In the case of human beings, kamma produces at
the first moment of life three groups of rūpa, one group with the
heartbase @footnote{In the planes of existence where there are nāma
and rūpa citta must have a physical base or place of origin. For
seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions the corresponding senses
are the physical bases. All the other types of citta also have a
physical base, and this rūpa is called the ``heart-base''.}, one group
with sex (male or female) and one group with bodysense. Since the
kusala kamma which produces nāma and rūpa at the moment of birth can be
of different degrees, the mental result and the bodily result it
produces can also be of different degrees. We can see that human beings
are born with different mental and bodily capacities. Some people are
beautiful, some ugly, some are apt to few illnesses, some to many
illnesses. When one is born with paññā, there are conditions to develop
it during one's life, even to the degree of enlightenment. Thus we see
that the diversity of the nāma and rūpa of human beings from the moment
of birth is dependent on conditions. 

The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, kusala ttika, Ch VII, Investigation
Chapter, Pañha-vāra, I, Conditions Positive, 1, Classification Chapter,
Root 7, 403) states about root-condition at the first moment of life:


@quotation

``At the moment of conception, resultant indeterminate roots (hetus which
are vipāka @footnote{As I explained in my Introduction, realities,
dhammas, can be classified as threefold: as kusala, as akusala and as
indeterminate, avyākatā. Indeterminate dhammas include vipāka and
kiriya, inoperative. Thus, hetus which are ``resultant indeterminate''
are hetus which are vipāka.}) are related to (their) associated
aggregates (khandhas) @footnote{The associated aggregates are the
citta and cetasikas, which arise together with the roots.} and
kamma-produced matter by root-condition.''

@end quotation



Not only cittas of the sense-sphere, kāmāvacara cittas, which are
accompanied by roots, are conditioned by these roots by way of
root-condition, hetu-paccaya, also cittas of higher planes of
consciousness, namely jhāna-cittas and lokuttara cittas, are
conditioned by the accompanying roots by way of hetu-paccaya. As to
rūpāvacara cittas (rūpa-jhānacittas), rūpāvacara kusala citta,
rūpāvacara vipākacitta and rūpāvacara kiriyacitta (of the arahat)
produce rūpas of the body. These rūpas are then conditioned by the
hetus accompanying the rūpa-jhānacittas by way of hetu-paccaya. As to
arūpāvacara cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas), arūpāvacara kusala citta and
arūpāvacara kiriyacitta produce rūpas of the body, and these rūpas are
then conditioned by the hetus accompanying those cittas by way of
hetu-paccaya. Arūpāvacara vipākacittas do not produce any rūpa; these
cittas which are the result of arūpa-jhāna, arise in arūpa-brahma
planes where there is no rūpa, only nāma @footnote{The
rebirth-consciousness in a higher plane of existence, namely, in a
rūpa-brahma plane or an arūpa-brahma plane, is the result of jhāna.}.
Lokuttara cittas produce rūpas of the body @footnote{In the planes of
existence where there are nāma and rūpa, citta produces rūpas such as
solidity, heat, suppleness, etc. throughout life. The lokuttara citta
which experiences nibbāna also produces such rūpas of the body.}. The
rūpa is then conditioned by hetus which are lokuttara, by way of
hetu-paccaya. 

In the ``Paṭṭhāna'' we read about many aspects of conditional relations
between phenomena and we should consider these in our daily life. The
study of root-condition can remind us to consider whether kusala citta
or akusala citta arises while we act, speak or think. 

The roots which arise together condition one another by way of
root-condition. Alobha and adosa always arise together and they may or
may not be accompanied by amoha, paññā. When there is amoha, the two
other roots which accompany the citta, namely alobha and adosa, are
conditioned by amoha. For instance, right understanding may accompany
generosity, alobha. While we give we may realize that generosity is
only a type of nāma, not self, and then the generosity is purer, it has
a higher degree of wholesomeness than generosity which is not
accompanied by right understanding. When someone is born with
mahā-vipākacitta (vipākacitta of the sense-sphere accompanied by
sobhana hetus), this citta may be accompanied by paññā or unaccompanied
by paññā. When the paṭisandhi-citta is accompanied by paññā one may, if
paññā is developed during that life, attain enlightenment.

Moha and lobha condition one another, and moha and dosa condition one
another. We may find it difficult to know the characteristic of moha
and we tend to forget that when there is lobha there is moha as well,
or when there is dosa there is moha as well. We should remember that
whenever akusala citta arises, there is ignorance of realities. When
we, for example, cling to a pleasant sound, we are at such a moment
blinded, we do not see the object as it really is, as a conditioned
reality which is impermanent. When we are annoyed, there is dosa as
well as ignorance. We do not like to have dosa because we do not like
unpleasant feeling, but we do not understand the conditions for dosa,
we forget that ignorance conditions it. When ignorance arises, we do
not see the danger and disadvantage of akusala. When we develop mettā,
dosa can be temporarily subdued, but for the eradication of dosa the
development of right understanding of realities is necessary. Only the
ariyan who has attained the third stage of enlightenment, the anāgāmī
(non-returner), has developed paññā to such degree that dosa has been
eradicated. Ignorance leads to all kinds of defilements and only right
understanding of nāma and rūpa can finally eradicate ignorance. 

The akusala hetus, unwholesome roots, are dangerous; they are
accumulated and they cause the arising of akusala cittas again and
again. They prevent us from kusala and cause disturbance of mind. We
read in the ``Itivuttaka'' (Khuddhaka Nikāya, ''As it was said'', Book of
the Threes, Ch IV, paragraph 9 @footnote{I am using the translation by Ven.
Nyanaponika, in ``Roots of Good and Evil'', Wheel no. 251/ 253, B.P.S.
Kandy.}) :

@quotation

``There are three inner taints, three inner foes, three inner enemies,
three inner murderers, three inner antagonists. What are these three?
Greed is an inner taint@dots{} Hatred is an inner taint@dots{} Delusion is an inner
taint, an inner foe, an inner enemy, an inner murderer, an inner
antagonist.
@sp 1
Greed is a cause of harm, @*
Unrest of mind it brings. @*
This danger that has grown within, @*
Blind folk are unaware of it. 
@sp 1
A greedy person cannot see the facts @*
Nor can he understand the Dhamma. @*
When greed has overpowered him, @*
In complete darkness is he plunged.
@sp 1
But he who can forsake this greed @*
And what to greed incites, not craves, @*
From him will quickly greed glide off, @*
As water from the lotus leaf.

@end quotation
@sp 1

The sutta then speaks about the danger and the forsaking of hate and of
delusion. We read about the forsaking of delusion:

@sp 1

@quotation
But who has shed delusion's veil, @*
Is undeluded where confusion reigns, @*
He scatters all delusion sure, @*
Just as the sun dispels the night.'' 
@end quotation

@sp 1
Feelings are also conditioned by the accompanying hetus by way of
hetu-paccaya. Pleasant feeling is different depending on whether it
accompanies akusala citta or kusala citta. There is unrest of mind with
the pleasant feeling accompanying clinging and there is calm with the
pleasant feeling accompanying generosity. When there is awareness, we
may realize that these two kinds of pleasant feeling are different. It
is useful to read about the different conditions for phenomena to
arise; we should consider their implications in daily life, so that we
can understand what kind of life we are leading. Is it a life full of
lobha, dosa and moha, or is right understanding being developed?



















@node Object-Condition

@chapter Object-Condition




Each citta which arises experiences an object and the accompanying
cetasikas also experience that object. The object conditions citta and
the accompanying cetasikas because they experience that object. Thus,
the object is in this case the conditioning factor, paccaya dhamma, and
the citta and cetasikas are the conditioned realities, paccayupanna
dhammas. Rūpa is not conditioned by way of object since rūpa does not
experience any object.

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Analytical Exposition of Conditions, 2):


@quotation

``Visible object-base is related to eye-consciousness element and its
associated states by object-condition.''

@end quotation



Visible object is also related to the other cittas of the eye-door
process by way of object-condition. It is the same with sound and the
other objects which can be experienced through the sense-doors and
through the mind-door. They are related to the cittas concerned by way
of object-condition.

Everything can be an object of experience. All conditioned nāmas and
rūpas, present, past or future, the unconditioned dhamma which is
nibbāna and also concepts which are not real in the ultimate sense can
be object. Rūpa can be experienced through sense-door and through
mind-door; citta, cetasika, nibbāna and concepts can be experienced
only through mind-door. Visible object which is experienced by seeing
has to arise before seeing arises and when seeing experiences it, it
has not fallen away yet, since rūpa lasts as long as seventeen moments
of citta @footnote{A sense-door process of cittas is followed by a
mind-door process of cittas which experience the same sense object as
the preceding sense-door process, but, since rūpa cannot last longer
than seventeen moments of citta, that sense object has just fallen away
when it is experienced by the cittas of the mind-door process which
follows upon the sense-door process. Later on other mind-door processes
of cittas can arise which experience concepts. See Appendix 1 and my
``Abhidhamma in Daily Life'', Ch 15.}.When visible object is
experienced through the mind-door it has just fallen away. Also seeing
can be object. Citta can, through the mind-door, experience another
citta such as seeing which has just fallen away. It must have fallen
away since only one citta at a time can arise. There may be, for
example, a citta with understanding (paññā) which realizes seeing as a
conditioned nāma which is impermanent. 

For an object to be experienced, there must be contact, phassa. Phassa
is a cetasika arising together with each citta and it ``contacts'' the
object so that citta can cognize it. Contact is nāma, it is different
from what we mean in conventional language by physical contact. There
is contact through the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the
bodysense and the mind. Phassa is an essential condition for citta to
experience an object. The rūpa which is colour can only be object when
phassa contacts it. It is the same with sound and the other objects. 

What kind of objects does phassa contact? In order to have more
understanding of the reasons why we have to experience particular
objects we should consider the object-condition and other conditions.
We may be in the company of a good friend in Dhamma so that we can hear
the right Dhamma and are able to develop right understanding. Or we may
be in the company of bad friends who are negligent of what is
wholesome. In these different situations it is phassa which contacts
different objects. We may be inclined to think that we can choose the
objects we experience. Even when it seems that we can choose, the
experience of objects is still conditioned. When the conditions are not
right, we cannot experience a particular object we wish to experience.
For example, we may long for the flavour of apple and we start to eat
it, but the inside may be spoilt and instead of a delicious flavour we
taste a bitter flavour. Or we turn on the radio in order to hear music,
but then we cannot hear it because the radio is out of order or the
noise outside is too loud. 

Several conditions work together for the experience of a particular
object. For example, when hearing-consciousness arises, it is kamma
which produces the vipākacitta which is hearing, as well as the
earsense which is the doorway and the physical base of hearing. If
kamma had not produced earsense one could not hear. Sound which
impinges on the earsense is experienced not only by
hearing-consciousness but also by other cittas arising in a process,
each having their own function while they experience sound. In each
process of cittas javana-cittas arise which are, in the case of
non-arahats, either kusala cittas or akusala cittas.

Cittas which experience objects are accompanied by different feelings.
Seeing, hearing, smelling and tasting which are vipākacittas
experiencing a pleasant or unpleasant object, are always accompanied by
indifferent feeling. Often it is not known whether the object
experienced by these cittas was pleasant or unpleasant, they fall away
immediately. When a pleasant or unpleasant tangible object is
experienced through the bodysense, the body-consciousness, which is
vipākacitta, is not accompanied by indifferent feeling but by pleasant
bodily feeling or by painful bodily feeling. The impact of tangible
object on the bodysense is more intense than the impact of the other
sense objects on the corresponding senses. After the vipākacittas have
fallen away javana-cittas arise. When these are kusala cittas they are
accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling, and when
these are akusala cittas they are accompanied by pleasant feeling,
unpleasant feeling or indifferent feeling.

When we are not engaged with what is wholesome, javana-cittas which are
akusala have the opportunity to arise. Hearing-consciousness may arise
at this moment and we may not notice that clinging arises shortly
afterwards. Clinging is bound to arise time and again. We think of what
was seen, heard or experienced through the other senses most of the
time with akusala cittas. There are many moments of ignorance when we
do not even realize that we are thinking. However, citta thinks time
and again of one object or another. When one has not studied the Dhamma
one confuses the different doorways and the different objects, one
``joins'' them together. One is inclined to believe that there is a self
who experiences a ``thing'' which lasts. 

Only one object can be experienced at a time. We may wonder why we
experience a particular object and why we shift our attention from one
object to another. The ``Atthasālinī'' (Expositor II, Book II, Part I, Ch
III, 333, 334) explains that the rūpas which can be experienced through
the senses become objects ``by virtue of deliberate inclination'' or
``by virtue of intrusion''. We should remember that even following our
own inclination is conditioned; that there is no self who can determine
what kind of object is to be experienced. The ``Atthasālinī'' gives
examples of experiencing an object with ``deliberate inclination'': when
the bowl (of a monk) is filled with food and offered to him, one who
takes up a lump and examines whether it is hard or soft, is considering
only the element of solidity, although heat as well as motion are
present @footnote{The four great Elements of solidity, cohesion, heat
and motion always arise together, but only one rūpa at a time can be
experienced. Solidity, heat and motion are tangible object, but
cohesion cannot be experienced through the bodysense, only through the
mind-door.}. As an example of the experience of an object ``by virtue
of intrusion'', the ``Atthasālinī'' states that he who slips, knocks his
head against a tree or in eating bites on a stone, takes as object only
solidity, on account of its intrusiveness, although heat and motion are
present as well. Further on the ``Atthasālinī states:


@quotation

``But how does the mind shift from an object? In one of two ways:- by
one's wish, or by excess of (a new) object. To expand: - one who goes
to festivities held in honour of monasteries, etc., with the express
wish of paying homage to the various shrines, to bhikkhus, images, and
of seeing the works of carving and painting, and when he has paid his
respects and seen one shrine or image, has a desire to pay homage to,
and see another, and goes off. This is shifting by one's wish. And one
who stands gazing at a great shrine like a silver mountain peak, when
subsequently a full orchestra begins to play, releases the visible
object and shifts to audible object; when flowers or scents possessing
delightful odour are brought, he releases the audible object and shifts
to the olfactory object. Thus the mind is said to shift owing to excess
of (a new) object.''

@end quotation



When we study and consider the Dhamma we may not hear the sound of
traffic, but when the sound is very loud we may hear it. Then that
object is intrusive. It is the same when we suffer from violent pains.
Then there is an object which is intrusive, we cannot think of anything
else but the pain. 

Pleasant objects and unpleasant objects are experienced by kusala cittas
and akusala cittas. Kusala citta as well as akusala citta can be
object-condition for kusala citta or for akusala citta.

Kusala citta can be the object of kusala citta. We read in the
``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, Kusala-ttika, VII, Investigation
Chapter, pañha-vāra, Object, paragraph 404):

@quotation


``Faultless state (kusala dhamma) is related to faultless state by
object-condition.

After having offered the offering, having undertaken the precept, having
fulfilled the duty of observance, (one) reviews it. Having emerged from
jhāna, (one) reviews it. (One) reviews (such acts) formerly well done.
Having emerged from jhāna, (one) reviews the jhāna. Learners @footnote{
The ``learner'', sekha, is the ariyan who is not arahat.} review
change-of-lineage @footnote{Gotrabhū, the mahā-kusala citta
accompanied by paññā preceding the magga-citta of the sotāpanna. Gotta
means clan. Gotrabhū refers to the person who will become of the ariyan
lineage.}. (They) review purification @footnote{Vodāna, the
mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā preceding the magga-citta of the
three higher stages of enlightenment (Vis. XXII, 23, footnote 7).}.
Learners, having emerged from the Path, review the Path @footnote{After the lokuttara cittas which arose at the attainment of enlightenment have fallen away, mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā reviews the magga-citta, path-consciousness.}. Learners or common
worldlings practise insight into impermanence, suffering and
impersonality of the faultless (state)@enddots{}''


@end quotation


Kusala can also be the object of akusala citta. We read in paragraph 405:


@quotation

``Faultless state (kusala dhamma) is related to faulty state (akusala
dhamma) by object-condition.

After having offered the offering, having undertaken the precept, having
fulfilled the duty of observance, (one) enjoys and delights in it.
Taking it as object, arises lust, arise wrong views, arises doubt,
arises restlessness, arises grief. 

Having emerged from jhāna, (one) enjoys and delights in the jhāna.
Taking it (jhāna) as object, arises lust, arise wrong views, arises
doubt, arises restlessness. When jhāna has disappeared, (one) regrets
it and thereby arises grief@enddots{}''


@end quotation


We should consider how object-condition operates in our daily life. Is
it not true that we cling to our kusala, that we have conceit on
account of it, that we find ourselves better than other people? We may
take the performing of kusala for self. Or we may think of it with
dosa. We may think of a generous deed with regret because we find that
the gift we bought was too expensive. We have accumulated akusala and
it will always find an object, even kusala. 

We read in the same section of the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (paragraph 407) that akusala can
be the object of akusala citta:


@quotation

``Faulty state is related to faulty state by object condition. (One)
enjoys and delights in lust. Taking it as object, arises lust, arise
wrong views, arises doubt, arises restlessness, arises grief@enddots{}''

@end quotation



Don't we like lobha and enjoy having it? We want to have as many moments
of enjoyment as possible. Then more lobha arises. If we do not realize
lobha as a conditioned reality we take it for ``my lobha''. Lobha can
also be object of dosa. We may feel guilty about lobha, we may have
aversion towards it and we may regret it. Any kind of defilement can be
object of akusala citta. 

Akusala can also be object of kusala citta, for example, when we
consider defilements with right understanding and realize them as
conditioned realities which are not self. We read in the same section
of the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (paragraph 408):


@quotation

``Faulty state is related to faultless state by object condition.

Learners review the eradicated defilements. They review the uneradicated
defilements. They know the defilements addicted to before. 

Learners or common worldlings practise insight into the impermanence,
suffering and impersonality of the faulty (state)@enddots{}''
@end quotation




The arahat can review kusala citta and akusala citta which formerly
arose with kiriyacitta, which is indeterminate (avyākata) dhamma. Then
kusala dhamma and akusala dhamma condition indeterminate dhamma by way
of object. 

Nibbāna and the eight lokuttara cittas which experience nibbāna cannot
be objects of clinging. The magga-cittas (lokuttara kusala cittas) of
the different stages of enlightenment eradicate defilements and
finally, at the stage of arahatship, they eradicate all kinds of
clinging. We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, Investigation
Chapter, Object, paragraph 410):


@quotation

``Learners review (lower) Fruition. (They) review Nibbāna. Nibbāna is
related to change-of-lineage, purification, Path by object-condition.''

@end quotation



Nibbāna is object-condition for the eight lokuttara cittas which
experience it, namely, the four magga-cittas (path-consciousness,
lokuttara kusala citta) and the four phala-cittas (``fruition'',
lokuttara vipākacitta) arising at the four stages of enlightenment. 

Nibbāna is also object-condition for the ``change-of lineage'', gotrabhū,
mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā, arising in the process when
enlightenment is attained, which precedes the magga-citta of the
sotāpanna and which is the first citta experiencing nibbāna. The
mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā preceding the magga-cittas of
the three higher stages of enlightenment is called ``purification''
(vodāna) and nibbāna is object-condition for this type of citta. 

After the lokuttara cittas have fallen away, maha-kusala cittas
accompanied by paññā in the case of the ``learners'', the ariyans who are
not arahat, review nibbāna and these cittas are conditioned by nibbāna
by way of object-condition. In the case of the arahat,
mahā-kiriyacittas accompanied by paññā review nibbbāna and these cittas
are conditioned by nibbāna by way of object-condition. 

Concepts can be objects of kusala citta, akusala citta or kiriyacitta.
We cling time and again to possessions, we want to have things such as
money, clothes or cars. Concepts can condition akusala citta by way of
object-condition. Clinging cannot be eradicated immediately, but we can
develop understanding in order to see things as they really are.

Concepts such as a person or a car are real in conventional sense, they
are not real in the ultimate sense. If we only pay attention to
concepts we tend to cling more and more to them. We may consider them
the goal of our life. Time and again we are absorbed in our thoughts
about people and things we perceive and we do not pay attention to the
cittas which think of such concepts at those moments and thus, we are
ignorant about what is really going on. We may not realize that there
is seeing-consciousness which experiences only what appears through the
eyesense, visible object, and that there are other types of cittas
which pay attention to shape and form and cling to concepts, ideas of
persons and things which seem to last. We should not try to avoid
thinking of concepts, they belong to daily life. We could not perform
our tasks without thinking of concepts. However, when right
understanding is being developed one comes to know that there is not a
``self'' who sees, recognizes, likes or dislikes. These are different
moments of cittas which change all the time. One will come to know when
the object of citta is visible object and when a concept. A concept
does not have a characteristic which can be directly experienced. When
we think of a person, we think of a ``whole'' which seems to last, but
what we take for a person consists of many different elements which
arise and fall away. Hardness may appear when we touch what we call a
person. Hardness is an ultimate reality with its own unchangeable
characteristic. Hardness is always hardness, it can be directly
experienced. We can denote it with different names, but its
characteristic remains the same. We cannot avoid thinking of ``people'',
that would be unnatural, but we should know that at some moments an
ultimate reality such as hardness is experienced, and at other moments
we think of a concept. The thinking itself is an ultimate reality with
its own characteristic, and it can be known as it is: a conditioned
reality which is not self. The arahat thinks about concepts but he does
not cling, he thinks with kiriyacitta. 

When we experience a pleasant object, attachment tends to arise, and
when we experience an unpleasant object, aversion tends to arise. These
objects condition akusala cittas by way of object-condition. We may
believe that a particular object inevitably conditions akusala citta,
but we may forget that there are other factors as well which condition
cittas. When an object presents itself there can be wise attention or
unwise attention to it; there is wise attention to the object when
kusala javana-cittas arise, and there is unwise attention when akusala
javana-cittas arise. We read in the ``Discourse on all the Cankers''
(Middle Length Sayings I, no. 2 @footnote{I am using the translation
by Ven. Nyanaponika, ``The Roots of Good and Evil'' I, 6. Wheel 251/ 253,
B.P.S. Kandy.}) that the Buddha, while he was staying near Sāvatthī, in
the Jeta Grove, spoke to the monks about the controlling of all the
cankers. We read:


@quotation

``The uninstructed common man@dots{} does not know the things worthy of
attention (manasikaranīye dhamme) nor those not worthy of attention
(amanasikaranīye)@enddots{}''

@end quotation



We read that he, therefore, fails to give attention to what is worthy of
it and directs his attention to what is unworthy. The well-instructed
disciple knows what is worthy of attention and what is not, and he acts
accordingly. We read in the Commentary to this sutta (Papañcasūdanī) :


@quotation

``@dots{}There is nothing definite in the nature of the things (or objects)
themselves that makes them worthy or unworthy of attention; but there
is such definiteness in the manner (ākāra) of attention. A manner of
attention that provides a basis for the arising of what is unwholesome
or evil (akusala), that kind of attention should not be given (to the
respective object); but the kind of attention that is the basis for the
arising of the good and wholesome (kusala), that manner of attention
should be given.''

@end quotation



When someone gives us a delicious sweet, it seems that we cannot help
liking it as soon as we taste it, and that attachment is bound to
arise. Then there is unwise attention to the object. But there can be
wise attention shortly afterwards, for example, when we truly
appreciate the kindness of the giver. Or we may consider that flavour
and the enjoyment of it do not last, that all realities are
impermanent. When someone speaks harsh words to us the sound is an
unpleasant object and we may have aversion towards it. Then there is
unwise attention. There can be wise attention if we, instead of having
aversion, see the benefit of having compassion with the person who
spoke harsh words. 

When aversion arises on account of violent pain, there is unwise
attention. But there can be wise attention when we understand that pain
is vipāka, produced by kamma, that it is unavoidable. We may consider
the impermanence and frailty of the body. Mindfulness of whatever
reality appears is most beneficial. Our body consists of different
rūpa-elements, and when there is pain the characteristics of hardness
or heat may appear. These can be very painful, but instead of thinking
of ``our pain'' mindfulness of realities can arise. Then we can see that
hardness or heat are rūpas which arise because of their own conditions
and that there is no self who has power over them. Painful feeling is
nāma which arises because of its own conditions, it is beyond control.
When aversion towards pain arises, aversion can be the object of
mindfulness so that it can be seen as only a conditioned nāma. Only by
right understanding of realities, clinging to ``my body'' or ``my mind''
can decrease. At the moment of right understanding there is truly wise
attention. 

We should not only consider object-condition but also the other kinds of
conditions which have been classified in the ``Paṭṭhāna'', so that we
shall understand the meaning of anattā, non-self. The teaching about
conditions is not theory; conditioning realities and conditioned
realities pertain to our daily life right now.

 If we have more understanding of the object that presents itself now we
shall also understand object-condition. Hardness may present itself at 
this moment through the body-door, and then hardness is
object-condition for the body-consciousness that experiences it, and if this is followed
by sati and paññā, hardness is object-condition for sati and paññā. But nobody
can manipulate object-condition. Who knows what the next object will be and
for which type of citta it will be object-condition? 

When we consider object-condition we can be reminded to be aware of 
whatever reality presents itself, no matter whether it is a pleasant
object or an unpleasant object, no matter whether it is kusala dhamma
or akusala dhamma. We attach great importance to the kind of object we
experience, but all our experiences are conditioned, beyond control.

@node Predominance-Condition
@chapter Predominance-Condition


We read in the''Paṭṭhāna'' (II, Analytical Exposition, 3) about two kinds
of predominance-condition:

@itemize @minus
@item 
conascent-predominance-condition (sahajātādhipati-paccaya)
	
@item 
object-predominance-condition (ārammaṇādhipati-paccaya)
@end itemize

As to conascent-predominance-condition, the conditioning factor
(paccaya) which has a dominating influence over the realities it
conditions (paccayupanna dhammas) is conascent with these, that is, it
arises together with them. Phenomena never arise alone, they arise
simultaneously with other phenomena. Citta does not arise alone, it is
accompanied by cetasikas; citta and cetasikas arise together and fall
away together. 

There are four factors which condition the dhammas they arise together
with by way of conascent-predominance-condition, and these are:

@itemize @minus

@item 
chanda (desire-to-do) @footnote{Chanda is a cetasika which arises with
cittas of the four jātis, but it does not arise with every citta. It
accompanies kusala citta as well as akusala citta. It is translated as
wish-to-do, desire or zeal.} 

@item 
viriya (energy or effort)

@item 
citta

@item 
vima@udotaccent{m}sa (investigation of Dhamma, paññā cetasika)

@end itemize

Three of these factors, namely, chanda, viriya and vima@udotaccent{m}sa are cetasikas
and one is citta, but not every citta can be a predominant factor as we
shall see. It is due to these four factors that great and difficult
enterprises can be accomplished. Whenever we wish to accomplish a task,
one of these four factors can be the leader, the predominance-condition
for the realities they arise together with and also for the rūpa which
is produced at that moment by citta @footnote{As we have seen, citta
is one of the factors which produces rūpas of the body.}. Only one of
these four factors at a time can be predominant. For example, when
chanda is foremost, the other three factors cannot be predominant at
the same time. Chanda, viriya and citta can be predominant in the
accomplishment of an enterprise or task both in a wholesome way and in
an unwholesome way, whereas vima@udotaccent{m}sa, investigation of Dhamma, which is
paññā, a sobhana cetasika, can only be predominant in a wholesome way. 

The conascent predominant factors can operate at the moments of
javana-cittas (kusala cittas or akusala cittas in the case of
non-arahats) @footnote{The javana-cittas arise in the sense-door
processes of cittas and in the mind-door process, and they ``run through
the object''. There are usually seven javana-cittas in a process of
cittas, and these are kusala cittas or akusala cittas. Arahats do not
have kusala cittas or akusala cittas, they have kiriyacittas which
perform the function of javana.}. Kusala cittas are always accompanied
by the two beautiful roots (sobhana hetus) of non-attachment (alobha)
and non-aversion (adosa) and, in addition, they can be accompanied by
paññā. Akusala cittas can be accompanied by two akusala roots: by
ignorance (moha) and attachment (lobha) or by ignorance and aversion
(dosa), or they may have ignorance as their only root. There are two
types of akusala cittas which have moha, ignorance, as their only root:
moha-mūla-citta (rooted in moha) accompanied by uddhacca (rest-
lessness) and moha-mūla-citta accompanied by doubt (vicikicchā) and
these cittas are weak compared to the akusala cittas that have two
akusala hetus. 

The conascent predominant factors do not operate in the case of these
two moha-mūlacittas, they only operate in the case of javana-cittas
that are accompanied by two or three roots. 

When one undertakes a work of art, such as painting, or when one applies
oneself to music, one is bound to do so with lobha-mūla-citta (citta
rooted in attachment). Lobha is attached to the object it experiences,
but it cannot accomplish anything, it is not a predominant factor.
Chanda, zeal or wish-to-do, which accompanies lobha-mūla-citta can be a
predominant factor in the accomplishment of one's undertakings, it
conditions the citta and the other cetasikas it accompanies by way of
conascent-predominance. When we are generous and like to give something
away, chanda, which is kusala in this case, may be predominant. The
kusala citta is also accompanied by alobha, non-attachment, and adosa,
non-aversion or kindness, but these wholesome roots cannot be
predominant in the accomplishment of a generous deed. It is chanda
which can be predominant in the accomplishment of the generous deed,
for example, when one chooses the gift and hands it to someone else. 

Viriya can be a predominant factor in the accomplishment of our tasks.
Preparing food may be part of our daily chores, and sometimes, when we
like to do this, chanda may be predominant. At other times we may find
it an effort but we may still want to cook. Then we may prepare food
with viriya as predominant factor. At such moments there is likely to
be lobha, but viriya is foremost in the accomplishment of cooking.

Citta can be a predominance-condition for the accompanying cetasikas,
but not all cittas can be predominance-condition. As we have seen,
predominance-condition can operate only in the case of javana-cittas
accompanied by at least two roots. Moha-mūla-citta, which has moha as
its only root cannot be predominance-condition, it has no strength to
accomplish any task. Lobha-mūla-citta and dosa-mūla-citta which each
have two roots (respectively moha and lobha, and moha and dosa), can be
predominance-condition: they have a dominating influence over the
accompanying cetasikas in the fulfilling of a task or enterprise in an
unwholesome way. All mahā-kusala cittas (kusala cittas of the
sense-sphere) and all mahā-kiriyacittas (of the arahat), have the two
roots of alobha, non-attachment, and adosa, non- aversion, and, in
addition, they can have the root which is paññā, thus, they have two or
three roots and, therefore, they can be predominance-condition for the
accompanying dhammas. When we accomplish a task with cittas which are
resolute, firmly established in kusala, the citta can be the
predominance-condition for the accompanying dhammas. 

Jhānacittas (kusala jhānacitta and kiriya jhānacitta of the arahat),
accompanied by the three roots of alobha, adosa and paññā, cannot arise
without predominance-condition. The lokuttara cittas, the maggacittas
and the phalacittas (lokuttara vipākacittas), accompanied by three
roots, perform the function of javana; the phalacittas which
immediately succeed the maggacittas are the only vipākacittas that
perform the function of javana. Lokuttara cittas cannot arise without
predominance-condition @footnote{For details about the cittas which
can be conascent-predominance-condition, see Appendix 2.}. 

Lobha cetasika is not a predominant factor, but lobha-mūla-citta, citta
rooted in attachment, can be predominance-condition, as we have seen.
For example, when there is wrong view and wrong practice, the citta
arising at that moment is firm and steady in this way of akusala, and
then that citta is predominance-condition for the accompanying dhammas.
That type of citta is rooted in moha and lobha and thus it is
conditioned by these two roots by way of root-condition. When we
abstain from slandering, the citta which is firm in kusala can be
predominant, and in that case chanda, wish-to-do, and viriya, effort,
are not predominant. 

With regard to investigation of the Dhamma, vima@udotaccent{m}sa, this is paññā
cetasika. When we listen to the Dhamma, consider it and are mindful of
realities, vima@udotaccent{m}sa can condition the accompanying citta and cetasikas
by way of predominance-condition. 

The rūpas produced by citta can also be conditioned by way of
predominance-condition. Body intimation (kāya-viññatti) and speech
intimation (vacī-viññatti ) are rūpas produced by citta @footnote{
Body-intimation is a kind of rūpa which conditions gestures and other
movements of the body by which we express our intentions. Speech
intimation is a rūpa which conditions speech sound by which we express
our intentions.}. When we present food to the monks, citta which is
firm in kusala can be the predominant factor. While we, at such an
occasion, show by our gestures our intention to give, there are rūpas
which are body intimation, and these are conditioned by kusala citta by
way of predominance-condition. When we slander, the citta which is firm
in akusala may be predominance-condition, and the rūpa which is speech
intimation is conditioned by the akusala citta by way of
predominance-condition. 

For the attainment of jhāna the predominant factors are necessary
conditions, and in that case they have to be sobhana. It is extremely
difficult to develop samatha to the degree of jhāna, and without the
conditioning force of one of the four predominant factors one would not
be able to attain jhāna. We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (III,24):


@quotation

``@dots{}If a bhikkhu obtains concentration, obtains unification of mind, by
making zeal (chanda) predominant, this is called concentration due to
zeal. If@dots{} by making energy predominant, this is called concentration
due to energy. If@dots{} by making (natural purity of) citta predominant,
this is called concentration due to citta. If@dots{} by making inquiry
(vima@udotaccent{m}sa) predominant, this is called concentration due to inquiry
(Vibhanga 216-219)@enddots{}'' 

@end quotation



Predominant factors can be of different degrees. When the four factors
mentioned above have been developed to a high degree, they have become
``bases of success'', iddhipādas, and then they can lead to the
acquisition of supernatural powers (Visuddhimagga, Ch XII, 50-53)
@footnote{Powers developed by means of samatha, such as walking on
water, knowing one's former lives, etc.}. The rūpas produced by citta
which exercises such powers are also conditioned by way of
predominance-condition.

In the development of vipassanā, right understanding of nāma and rūpa,
one also needs the ``four bases of success'' for the realisation of the
stages of insight wisdom and for the attainment of enlightenment. The
arising of awareness and understanding of realities is beyond control,
it is due to conditions. We need patience and courage to persevere
studying and considering nāma and rūpa, and to be aware of them in
daily life. For the accomplishment of our task, the development of
right understanding, the factors which are predominance-condition are
indispensable. The study of the predomi-nance-condition can be a
reminder that right understanding is dependent on different kinds of
conditions, that it does not depend on a ``self''. We read in the
``Kindred Sayings'' (V, Mahā-vagga, Book VII, Kindred Sayings on the
Bases of Psychic Power (Iddhipādas, Bases of Success), Ch I, 2,
Neglected):

@quotation

``By whomsoever, monks, the four bases of psychic power are neglected, by
them also is neglected the ariyan way that goes on to the utter
destruction of dukkha. By whomsoever, monks, the four bases of psychic
power are undertaken, by them also is undertaken the ariyan way that
goes on to the utter destruction of dukkha@enddots{}''

@end quotation



It is then explained what the four bases of psychic power (iddhipādas)
are. They arise together with right concentration and with right
effort. Right effort in vipassanā is right effort to be aware of
whatever reality appears at this moment. 

As we have seen, there are two kinds of predominance-condition:
conascent-predominance-condition and object-predominance-condition. In
the case of conascent-predominance-condition the conditioning factor
arises simultaneously with the conditioned dhammas, but this is not so
with object-predominance-condition. As regards
object-predominance-condition (ārammaṇādhipati-paccaya), not every
object citta experiences is object-predominance-condition. An object
which is predominance-condition is highly regarded by citta and the
accompanying cetasikas so that they give preponderance to it. The
predominant object is the conditioning factor (paccaya), and the citta
and cetasikas which experience that object are the conditioned dhammas
(paccayupanna dhammas). Object-predominance-condition is different from
object-condition. For example, when we like the colour of a certain
cloth, but we do not particularly want to possess it, that object
conditions the lobha-mūla-citta by way of object-condition. When we
like that cloth very much and want to possess it, that object
conditions the lobha-mūla-citta by way of
object-predominance-condition. We then give preponderance to that
object.

Certain objects cannot be object-predominance-condition, because they
are undesirable. Among them is the type of body-consciousness which is
akusala vipāka, accompanied by painful feeling @footnote{Body-consciousness is vipākacitta which experiences pleasant or
unpleasant tangible objects. When it is kusala vipāka it is accompanied
by pleasant bodily feeling and when it is akusala vipāka it is
accompanied by unpleasant bodily feeling.}. The two types of
dosa-mūla-citta (one type unprompted and one type prompted, c.f.
Appendix 2) cannot be object-predominance-condition. They are
accompanied by unpleasant feeling and thus they are not desirable. The
two types of moha-mūla-citta, one associated with doubt and one
associated with restlessness, cannot be object-predominance-condition,
they are not desirable. The akusala cetasikas which accompany
dosa-mūla-citta and moha-mūla-citta are not desirable either, thus,
they cannot be object-predominance-condition. One could not esteem
regret, jealousy or stinginess, akusala cetasikas which may accompany
dosa-mūla-citta. 

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation
Chapter, Conditions: Positive, 1, Classification Chapter, Predominance,
10, paragraph 413):

@quotation


``@dots{} After having offered the offering, having undertaken the precept,
having fulfilled the duty of observance, (one) esteems and reviews it.
(One) esteems and reviews (such acts) formerly well done@enddots{}''


@end quotation


Wholesomeness can be object-predominance-condition for kusala citta
which esteems and considers the wholesome deed which was done. In this
case one gives preponderance to that object. When we have been generous
we can recollect our generosity and this is a condition for the arising
of other kusala cittas.

We read in the same section (paragraph 414) that dāna, sīla and jhāna can be
object-predominance-condition also for akusala citta. When we have
performed generous deeds with kusala citta we may find that citta highly
desirable, we may be pleased with our own generosity. There may be
attachment and wrong view on account of our good deeds. If we do not
know the different conditions for kusala citta and akusala citta we may
take for kusala what is actually akusala. Thus, kusala can be object of
clinging, it can even be object-predominance-condition for clinging.
Anything can be object of clinging, except nibbāna and the eight
lokuttara cittas which experience it. As we have seen (in Ch 2),
lokuttara dhammas cannot be object-condition for lobha-mūla-citta;
neither can they be object-predominance-condition for lobha-mūla-citta.
 

Nibbāna is object-predominance-condition for the eight lokuttara cittas
that experience it @footnote{Nibbāna is object-condition and
object-predominance-condition for the cittas that experience it.
Dhammas can condition other dhammas by way of more than one condition
at a time.}. Nibbāna is object-predominance-condition for the
``change-of lineage'', gotrabhū, arising in the process when
enlightenment is attained, preceding the magga-citta of the sotāpanna,
and for the ``purification'' (vodāna) preceding the magga-cittas of the
three higher stages of enlightenment @footnote{The change-of-lineage
and the purification are mahā-kusala cittas accompanied by paññā
experiencing nibbāna, and these arise in the process when enlightenment
is attained.}.

Nibbāna and lokuttara cittas are object-predominance-condition for the
mahā-kusala cittas and mahā-kiriyacittas (of the arahat) which arise
after the attainment of enlightenment and which review, consider with
paññā, nibbāna and the lokuttara cittas which arose. 

Akusala can condition akusala citta by way of object-predominance-condition. We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'', in the same section,
paragraph 415: 


@quotation

``(One) esteems, enjoys and delights in lust. Taking it as estimable
object, arises lust, arises wrong views. (One) esteems, enjoys and
delights in wrong views. Taking it as estimable object, arises lust,
arise wrong views.''

@end quotation



If someone does not see the danger of lobha, he considers it the goal of
his life to have as much enjoyment as possible. We like to enjoy
nature, to buy beautiful clothes, to eat delicious food, to hear nice
music. We like to enjoy all the pleasant things of life. It is natural
that we enjoy pleasant things, but we can also develop right
understanding of the different cittas which arise in daily life. 

Pleasant sense objects are desirable and they can condition
lobha-mūla-citta by way of object-predominance-condition. It may happen
that we have many duties to do but that we are so carried away by the
sound of music that we leave our duties and play the piano or go to a
concert. Then we give preponderance to sound and this is
object-predominance-condition for lobha-mūla-citta. This happens time
and again in our daily life. We should not pretend that we do not have
lobha, we should come to know our inclinations as they are. When lobha
has arisen already because of its own conditions, we should not ignore
it, but we can develop right understanding of it. When there is
mindfulness of lobha when it appears, it can be known as a conditioned
nāma, not self.

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (in the same section, paragraph 416):


@quotation

``(One) esteems, enjoys and delights in the eye@dots{} ear@dots{} nose@dots{} tongue@dots{} body@dots{}
visible object@dots{} sound@dots{} smell@dots{} taste@dots{} tangible object@dots{} (heart-)base@dots{}
Taking it as estimable object, arises lust, arises wrong views@enddots{}'' 

@end quotation



The rūpas which have their own distinct nature @footnote{These are
sabhāva rūpas. ``Bhāva'' means nature and ``sa'' can mean own. Sabhāva
rūpas are rūpas with their own distinct nature. There are also asabhāva
rūpas, which are not rūpas with their own distinct nature but which are
special qualities or characteristics connected with other rūpas.
Sabhāva rūpas are, for example, the four great Elements, the sense
objects and the sense organs. Asabhāva rūpas, rūpas which do not have
their own distinct nature, are, for example, the special qualities of
rūpa which are lightness, pliancy and wieldiness. Or the four
characteristics of rūpa which are origination, continuation, decay and
impermanence of rūpa.} can be object-predominance-condition. Rūpa
which is a desirable object can be object-predominance-condition only
for lobha-mūla-citta. Rūpa cannot condition kusala citta by way of
object-predominance-condition, only by way of object-condition. For
example, if we want to give beautiful flowers to someone else, rūpa,
such as colour or odour, can condition kusala citta by way of
object-condition; rūpa is the object experienced by kusala citta. That
rūpa cannot be object-predominance-condition for kusala citta. If one
gives preponderance to it and wants to have it again and again it is
object-predominance-condition for lobha-mūlacitta, but not for kusala
citta. Kusala citta is accompanied by detachment, alobha, it is intent
on letting go of objects.

The kusala one has performed before, such as generosity, may be
object-predominance-condition for kusala citta, it can be a condition
for kusala cittas to arise again. The development of kusala is
conditioned by kusala accumulated in the past, and also by the factors
of chanda (wish-to-do), viriya (effort), citta and vima@udotaccent{m}sa
(investigation of the Dhamma), which are
conascent-predominance-conditions. 

We should find out to which objects we give preponderance. We should
know whether they condition kusala citta or lobha-mūla-citta. It is
important to realize in which way objects can condition different
cittas. When lobha-mūla-citta arises the object it experiences may
condition that citta only by way of object-condition or it may
condition it by way of object-predominance as well. At different
moments different conditions play their part in our life. Kusala can
condition wrong view or conceit by way of
object-predominance-condition: we may attach great importance to the
notion of ``my kusala'' with wrong view. Or we may have a high esteem of
our good deeds with conceit, while we compare ourselves with others. 

When we are attached to colourful pictures our attachment may be
object-predominance-condition for lobha-mūla-cittas; we may be quite
absorbed in our enjoyment and forgetful of the development of right
understanding. At other moments we may devote time to the study and the
consideration of the Dhamma so that right understanding can develop.
The Dhamma we hear may condition mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā
by way of object-predominance-condition. We read in the ``Lesser
Discourse on the Destruction of Craving''(Middle Length Sayings I, no.
37) that Sakka, lord of the devas, had inclinations to mental
development, but when there were conditions to enjoy sense-pleasures,
he was absorbed in those. We read that Sakka asked the Buddha, who was
staying near Savatthī in the Eastern Monastery, to what extent a monk
comes to be completely freed by the destruction of craving. The Buddha
answered:


@quotation

``As to this, lord of devas, a monk comes to hear: ‘It is not fitting
that there should be inclination towards any (mental-physical)
conditions' @footnote{In the ``Papañcasūdanī ``, the Commentary to this
sutta, it is stated that these are the five khandhas, the twelve
sense-fields (āyātanas), the eighteen elements.}. If, lord of devas, a
monk comes to hear this, that ‘It is not fitting that there should be
any inclination towards any (mental-physical) conditions', he knows all
the conditions thoroughly, he knows all the conditions accurately; by
knowing all the conditions accurately, whatever feeling he feels,
pleasant or painful or neither painful nor pleasant, he abides viewing
impermanence, he abides viewing dispassion, he abides viewing stopping,
he abides viewing renunciation in regard to those feelings.''


@end quotation


We then read that when he is so abiding he grasps after nothing in the
world and attains arahatship. Sakka rejoiced in what the Buddha had
said and after having given thanks he vanished. Moggallāna wanted to
find out whether Sakka had grasped the meaning of the Buddha's words
and to this end he appeared among the ``devas of the Thirtythree''.
Sakka, who was equipped and provided with five hundred deva-like
musical instruments, was amusing himself. When he saw Moggallāna coming
he stopped those instruments and welcomed Moggallāna. Moggallāna then
asked Sakka to repeat the Buddha's words about freedom by the
destruction of craving. Sakka answered:

@quotation


``I, my good Moggallāna, am very busy, there is much to be done by me;
both on my own account there are things to be done, and there are also
(still more) things to be done for the devas of the Thirtythree.
Further, my good Moggallāna, it was properly heard, properly learnt,
properly attended to, properly reflected upon, so that it cannot vanish
quickly@enddots{}''


@end quotation


Sakka invited Moggallāna to come and see the delights of his splendid
palace. Moggallāna thought that Sakka lived much too indolently and
wanted to agitate him. By his supernatural power he made the palace
tremble, shake and quake. Moggallāna asked Sakka again to repeat the
Buddha's words and then Sakka did repeat them.

We may recognize ourselves in Sakka when he tries to find excuses not to
consider the Dhamma. We also are inclined to think at times that we are
too busy to develop right understanding of realities, to be aware of
nāma and rūpa over and over again, until they are thoroughly
understood. When Moggallāna agitated Sakka there were conditions for
him to give preponderance to the development of right understanding.
Our life is likewise. When we listen to the Dhamma or read the
scriptures there can be conditions to give preponderance to the
consideration of the Dhamma and the development of right understanding.
When there is mindfulness of nāma and rūpa as they appear one at a
time, they can eventually be known as they are: elements which are
non-self. 






@node Proximity and Contiguity-Condition

@chapter Proximity and Contiguity-Condition




We may wonder why life goes on and on. Yesterday there were seeing,
hearing and thinking, and today these realities occur again.
Experiences occur time and again because there are conditions for them.
Proximity-condition and contiguity-condition are conditions for cittas
to arise again and again, in succession. Each citta with its associated
cetasikas falls away and conditions the arising of the succeeding citta
with its associated cetasikas. The next citta cannot arise if the
preceding citta has not fallen away, there can be only one citta at a
time. It is difficult to know the succession of the different cittas
since they arise and fall away very rapidly. Attachment may arise in a
sense-door process and then in the mind-door process @footnote{See
Appendix 1.}, but, so long as there is no clear understanding of
different realities, it seems that attachment can last for a while. In
reality there are different cittas arising and falling away, succeeding
one another because of proximity-condition and contiguity-condition. 

Anantara (proximity) means: without interval. Anantara and samanantara
(contiguity) are different in name, but the same in meaning
(Visuddhimagga, XVII, 74). Citta conditions, after it has ceased, the
arising of the subsequent citta, without interval; citta is
anantara-paccaya for the next citta. Moreover, citta is
samanantara-paccaya for the next citta; cittas follow upon one another
in the proper way, in accordance with a fixed order in their subsequent
arising. ``Sa@udotaccent{m}'' in samanantara can mean right or proper. The
rebirth-consciousness, for example, is not followed by seeing, but by
the first bhavanga-citta in that life. The condition of
samanantara-paccaya has been taught in addition to anantara paccaya for
the benefit of the listeners who might have misunderstandings.
Samanantara is sometimes translated as immediate contiguity. 




The preceding citta is the condition, paccaya, for the arising of the
subsequent citta which is the conditioned dhamma (paccayupanna dhamma).
The conditions of proximity and of contiguity do not pertain to rūpa.
Rūpa can be produced by four factors: by kamma, by citta, by nutrition
and by temperature or heat. Rūpas arise and then fall away and so long
as there are conditions new rūpas are produced by the four factors
@footnote{In some cases there can be temporary suspension of citta,
and then only rūpas arise and fall away. Those who have developed
samatha up to the fourth stage of arūpa-jhāna, the ``Sphere of Neither
Perception Nor Non-Perception `` and who have also realized the stage of
enlightenment of the anāgāmī, non-returner, and of the arahat, can
attain ``cessation'' nirodha-samāpatti. This is the temporary suspension
of citta, cetasikas and mind-produced rūpa. Rūpas produced by kamma,
temperature and nutriment, in the case of human beings, and rūpas
produced by kamma and temperature, in the case of beings in the Brahma
plane, continue to arise. When they emerge from cessation, the first
citta which arises is the phala-citta, fruition-consciousness
(lokuttara vipākacitta), which has nibbāna as its object. For the
anāgāmī it is the phala-citta of the anāgāmī and for the arahat it is
the phala-citta of the arahat. This citta is conditioned by the
preceding citta, the arūpa-jhānacitta of the fourth stage which
occurred prior to cessation. Thus, the force of proximity is not
destroyed by the temporary suspension of citta. It is the same in
the case of rebirth in the asañña-satta plane, the plane where there is
only rūpa. When the lifespan in that plane is over and there is rebirth
in the sensuous plane, the rebirth-consciousness is conditioned by the
dying-consciousness which occurred prior to rebirth in the
asañña-satta-plane. Thus, the force of proximity is not destroyed.} .


The rebirth-consciousness, paṭisandhi-citta, which is vipākacitta,
conditions the arising of the succeeding citta, the first
bhavanga-citta in that life, which is of the same type of citta as the
rebirth-consciousness. The bhavanga-cittas which arise throughout life,
in between the sense-door and the mind-door processes of cittas, are of
the same type of citta @footnote{Bhavanga-cittas do not experience the
objects which impinge on the six doors and which are experienced by the
cittas arising within processes. Bhavanga-cittas experience the same
object as the rebirth-consciousness, and this object is the same as the
object experienced shortly before the dying-consciousness in the
previous life. The object which the bhavanga-citta experiences does not
appear to us, we do not know it.}. When there is birth in an unhappy
plane of existence, such as the animal plane, the rebirth-consciousness
is akusala vipākacitta. Because of proximity-condition and
contiguity-condition bhavanga-citta succeeds the rebirth-consciousness
and this citta is also akusala vipākacitta. The bhavanga-citta is in
accordance with that kind of birth, it could not be changed into kusala
vipākacitta. When one is born with mahā-vipākacitta @footnote{Kusala
vipākacitta of the sense sphere, accompanied by two or three sobhana
hetus, beautiful roots.} acccompanied by the three sobhana hetus of
alobha, non-attachment, adosa, non-aversion, and amoha or paññā, the
succeeding bhavanga-citta is of the same type of citta as the
rebirth-consciousness. The bhavanga-citta is conditioned by the
rebirth-consciousness by way of proximity-condition and
contiguity-condition. The person who is born with three sobhana hetus
has the possibility to attain enlightenment in that life if paññā is
developed. Because of proximity-condition and contiguity-condition the
potentialities one is born with are carried on from moment to moment. 

Besides bhavanga-cittas, there are also cittas arising in sense-door
processes and mind-door processes which experience objects impinging on
the six doors. In the course of life we experience happiness and
sorrow, but we could not have such experiences if the
rebirth-consciousness had not arisen and if this citta was not
succeeded by the following cittas, bhavanga-cittas and cittas arising
in sense-door processes and mind-door processes. Our life is an
unbroken series of cittas, succeeding one another without interval. 

The cittas which perform their functions in the different processes
@footnote{See Appendix 1 for these processes. One cannot understand
the conditions of proximity and contiguity if one is not familiar with
the processes of citta.} succeed one another in a regular order. The
sense-door adverting-consciousness, the first citta which arises in a
sense-door process, is conditioned by the last bhavanga-citta arising
before the sense-door process starts, by way of proximity-condition and
contiguity-condition. The sense-door adverting-consciousness
experiences an object different from the object the bhavanga-citta
experiences; it adverts to the object which impinges on one of the
senses and is then succeeded by one of the sense-cognitions (the five
pairs, pañca-viññāṇas, one kusala vipākacitta and one akusala
vipākacitta, of seeing, hearing, etc.) which experiences that object.
Seeing and hearing arise time and again, also now. Thus, we know that
the conditions of proximity and contiguity still continue to operate.
The sense-cognition, such as seeing or hearing, does not last, it falls
away and conditions the arising of the next citta, the
receiving-consciousness, sampaṭicchana-citta, which ``receives'' the
object. This citta is succeeded by the investigating-consciousness,
santīraṇa-citta, which investigates the object, and this again by the
determining-consciousness, votthapana-citta which ``determines'' the
object. The votthapana-citta, after it has determined the object, is,
in the case of non-arahats, followed by akusala javana-cittas or kusala
javana-cittas. There are usually seven types of javana-cittas in a
process of cittas, performing the function of impulsion or ``running
through'' the object. The javana-cittas may be succeeded by the
registering-consciousness, tadārammaṇa-cittas, vipākacittas which ``hang
on'' to the object. Each of these cittas is conditioned by the preceding
citta by way of proximity and contiguity, and in its turn, each of them
conditions the arising of the next citta in these ways. After the
sense-door process has been completed there are bhavanga-cittas again
and then the object can be experienced by cittas arising in a mind-door
process. The mind-door adverting-consciousness which adverts to the
object through the mind-door, is the first citta of the mind-door
process. It is succeeded by javana-cittas (in the case of non-arahats
akusala cittas or kusala cittas), and then registering-consciousness,
tadārammaṇa-cittas may arise. The cittas arising within the different
processes do so according to a particular order which is unchangeable;
they succeed one another without any interval and this is conditioned
by way of proximity and contiguity. The javana-cittas, for instance,
cannot arise if, in the sense-door process, the
determining-consciousness and, in the mind-door process, the mind-door
adverting-consciousness has not arisen. This reminds us that there is
no self who can cause the arising of particular cittas. 

When the object which is experienced is rūpa, such as visible object or
sound, it lasts as long as seventeen moments of citta @footnote{See Ch
2. This is so when a process of cittas runs its full course. A process,
however, can be interrupted earlier. For details see Appendix 1.}.
Seventeen moments is still extremely short. The experience of visible
object and sound seem to occur at the same time, but in reality several
processes of cittas which experience these different objects have
occurred. If insight has not been developed, one does not realize the
falling away of citta and the arising of the succeeding citta. We find
the experience of sense objects very important, but we should remember
that these experiences are fleeting, insignificant. Only through
satipaṭṭhāna the understanding can be developed which realizes the
arising and falling away of realities. We are born in the human plane
where we have the opportunity to hear the Dhamma and, since such
opportunity is rare, we should not neglect the development of
understanding of realities. 

Throughout the cycle of birth and death the conditions of proximity and
contiguity prevail with unbroken continuity. Because of the
uninterrupted succession of cittas past lives condition the present
life and evenso the present life will condition future lives. Each
citta falls away completely, but it conditions the succeeding citta.
Tendencies and inclinations we had in former lives have been
accumulated from moment to moment up to the present. Since each citta
which falls away conditions the succeeding citta we can accumulate
skills, knowledge and wisdom. It is because of proximity-condition and
contiguity-condition that we can remember past experiences, events
which occurred many years ago. 

Kammas, good and bad deeds, committed in the past are accumulated from
moment to moment, from life to life, and they can produce their
appropriate results later on, when it is the right time. Because of
kamma which produces results, pleasant or unpleasant objects are
experienced through the senses by cittas which arise within processes.
We see pleasant and unpleasant objects; seeing is vipākacitta, produced
by kamma. The eye-door adverting-consciousness which precedes seeing in
the eye-door process is also a condition for seeing: it conditions
seeing by way of proximity-condition and contiguity-condition. If there
were no eye-door adverting-consciousness, seeing could not arise.
Cittas arise and fall away succeeding one another continuously because
of conditions and we never know what the next moment will bring. We may
be surprised that we quite suddenly have to suffer great pain or an
accident. We are surprised, because we do not see proximity-condition
and contiguity-condition which occur all the time within the cycle of
birth and death. 

The rebirth-consciousness, paṭisandhi-citta, is vipākacitta produced by
kamma. Kamma causes us to be born in particular circumstances, in a
particular family, where there will be favorable conditions or
unfavorable conditions to do good deeds and to develop right
understanding. The rebirth-consciousness is preceded by the
dying-consciousness, the last citta of the preceding life. Because of
proximity-condition the dying-consciousness is succeeded without any
interval by the rebirth-consciousness. If we understand the
proximity-condition occurring now, at this moment, we shall also see
that the last citta of this life conditions the first citta of the
following life by way of proximity-condition. The dying-consciousness
may arise in a happy plane of existence, such as the human plane, but
it can be succeeded by the rebirth-consciousness arising in an unhappy
plane. 

After this life there will be another life, until one has attained
arahatship. The dying-consciousness of the arahat is not
proximity-condition for rebirth-consciousness. So long as we are in the
cycle of birth and death and we have not attained the state of the
sotāpanna (who has realized the first stage of enlightenment), we can
still be subject to an unhappy rebirth. 

In the ``Kindred Sayings'' (I, Sagāthā-vagga, Ch VII, Brahmin Suttas, 2,
The Lay Adherents, paragraph 2, Udaya) we are reminded of rebirth with its
toils and sufferings, again and again, until arahatship has been
attained. We read that the Buddha, on three consecutive days, came with
his bowl to Udaya who filled it with rice. After the third time Udaya
critizised the Buddha for coming again and again. The Buddha answered:

@sp 1
@quotation

``Again, again is seed in furrow sown,

Again, again the cloud-king sends down rain,

Again, again the ploughmen plough the fields,

Again, again comes corn into the realm,

Again, again do beggars go their round,

Again, again do generous donors give,

Again, again when many gifts are given,

Again, again the donors find their heaven.

Again, again the dairy-folk draw milk,

Again, again the calf its mother seeks,

Again, again we tire and toil anew,

Again, again the slow wits seek rebirth,

Again, again comes birth, and dying comes,

Again, again men bear us to the grave.

@sp 1


When once the man of broad insight that Path

Which brings no new becoming does attain,

Then is he no more born again, again.''
@sp 1

@end quotation



We then read that Udaya expressed his appreciation of the Buddha's words
and took refuge in the Triple Gem. He wanted to become a layfollower of
the Buddha. 













@node Conascence and Mutuality-Condition

@chapter Conascence and Mutuality-Condition




In the case of conascence-condition, a conditioning dhamma, paccaya
dhamma, on arising, causes the conditioned dhammas, paccayupanna
dhammas, to arise simultaneously with it. The Pāli term sahajāta in
sahajāta-paccaya, conascence-condition, means: that which has arisen
together. In the case of proximity-condition and contiguity-condition,
the conditioning dhamma arises previously to the conditioned dhamma. 

We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XVII, 77):


@quotation

``A dhamma which, while arising, assists (another dhamma) by making it
arise together with itself is a conascence-condition, as a lamp is for
illumination@enddots{}''

@end quotation



For the explanation of conascence-condition the ``Visuddhimagga'' uses the
simile of an oil lamp: when its flame appears the light, colour and
heat are produced simultaneously with it. Light, colour and heat
produced by the flame are not present before the flame appears nor
after it dies out @footnote{See ``Guide to Conditional Relations'' Part
I, p. 23, by U Nārada.}. 

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (II, Analytical Exposition, 6,
Conascence-condition) about different classes of phenomena, nāma and
rūpa, mentioned in relation to conascence-condition. We read with
regard to the first class: 


@quotation

``The four immaterial aggregates (nāmakkhandhas) are mutually related to
one another by conascence-condition.''

@end quotation



Viññāṇakkhandha, citta, cannot arise without the three other
nāmakkhandhas, namely: vedanākkhandha (feeling), saññākkhandha
(remembrance or perception) and saṅkhārakkhandha (formations, the other
cetasikas). Citta is different from cetasika, it does not feel or
remember; citta is the ``chief'' in cognizing an object but it needs the
accompanying cetasikas which share the same object and which each have
their own task while they assist the citta. Citta cannot arise without
cetasika and cetasika cannot arise without citta, they condition one
another by conascence-condition. Citta needs for example the cetasika
phassa, contact, which contacts the object so that citta can cognize
it. Thus, citta is conditioned by phassa by way of conascence. Phassa
is conditioned by citta and the accompanying cetasikas by way of 
conascence. When phassa accompanies akusala citta it is also akusala
and when it accompanies kusala citta it is also kusala. 

Each of the four nāmakkhandhas can be taken in turn as conditioning
dhamma or as conditioned dhamma because they are mutually related by
way of conascence. The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, Ch VII,
Investigation Chapter. Conditions: positive, 1, classification chapter,
Conascence 9, paragraph 419) expresses this as follows:


@quotation

``Faultless state (kusala dhamma) is related to faultless state by
conascence-condition.

One faultless khandha is related to three (faultless) khandhas by
conascence-condition; three khandhas are related to one khandha by
conascence-condition; two khandhas are related to two khandhas by
conascence-condition.''

@end quotation



This pertains only to the four nāmakkhandhas. The same is said with
regard to the four nāmakkhandhas which are akusala (faulty). 

When lobha-mūla-citta, citta rooted in attachment, arises, the four
nāmakkhandhas are akusala and they condition one another by way of
conascence. Lobha-mūla-citta has as roots moha and lobha, and these
roots condition the accompanying dhammas by way of conascence-condition
and also by way of root-condition. Phenomena can condition other
phenomena in several ways. Lobha-mūla-citta may be accompanied by
pleasant feeling. Feeling is conditioned by citta and the accompanying
cetasikas, and when it accompanies akusala citta it is also akusala.
Pleasant feeling which is akusala has a characteristic which is quite
different from pleasant feeling which is kusala. When we enjoy
delicious food with pleasant feeling, that feeling is different from
pleasant feeling arising when we appreciate someone else's kusala. In
the latter case it is more refined and calm. There are many sobhana
cetasikas accompanying kusala citta: calm, evenmindedness, confidence
in kusala, mindfulness. They all condition the pleasant feeling that is
kusala. 

It is beneficial to learn more about conascence-condition because this
condition pertains directly to our every day life. Citta and cetasikas
which arise together condition one another mutually. When one, for
example, develops understanding of nāma and rūpa, kusala citta is
accompanied by paññā and by many other sobhana cetasikas. That citta is
also accompanied by sati which is mindful of the reality which appears,
by ``applied thinking'', vitakka @footnote{Vitakka cetasika arises with
many cittas, but not with every citta. When it accompanies akusala
citta it is wrong thinking and when it accompanies kusala citta it is
right thinking. As a factor of the eightfold Path it is called ``right
thinking''.}, which ``touches'' the object so that paññā can understand
it, by non-attachment, alobha, and by other cetasikas which each
perform their own function. They all mutually support one another while
they arise together. There are many degrees of paññā and as paññā grows
it also supports the accompanying sobhana cetasikas. Alobha,
non-attachment, for example, is still weak in the beginning, but as
paññā develops, alobha also develops; this leads to more detachment
from realities. 

Citta and cetasikas can be of four ``jātis'' (classes), they can be
kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. Some cetasikas can accompany cittas
of the four jātis, but in each case they are completely different
because they are conditioned by the citta and the other cetasikas they
accompany. Manasikāra, attention, for example, is a cetasika which
arises with each citta, but it is quite different when it accompanies
lobha-mūla-citta which clings to the object which is experienced, or
when it accompanies kusala citta which is intent on generosity or on
the observance of sīla. Viriya, energy or effort, can be energy for
what is wholesome, or it can be energy exerted in an unwholesome way;
effort can accompany kusala citta and akusala citta. One may make a
great effort to obtain a beautiful gem one clings to, and this is
different from the well-balanced effort that accompanies kusala citta.

Thus, there is a great variety of citta and cetasikas which mutually
support one another. When we come to understand better the different
conditions for the realities which arise, it will help us to see that
there is no self who experiences objects, likes or dislikes them, or
develops right understanding. 

As to the second class of phenomena mentioned in relation to
conascence-condition, we read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Analytical Exposition,
6):


@quotation

``The four great primaries (Great Elements, mahā-bhūta rūpas) are
mutually related to one another by conascence-condition.''

@end quotation



The Elements of Earth (solidity), Water (cohesion), Fire (temperature)
and Wind (motion) always arise together and condition one another.
Rūpas of the body and rūpas of materiality outside arise and fall away
in groups or units, and the four Great Elements are included in each
group. Solidity is the foundation of the other three elements,
temperature maintains the other three elements, cohesion holds them
together and the element of motion @footnote{Motion is not movement in
conventional sense; this rūpa has the characteristic of motion or
pressure. It is sometimes translated as oscillation or vibration. It
causes distension, and this can be noticed, for example, when there is
pressure of air in the stomach or abdomen.} acts as their distension
(Visuddhimagga XI, 109). 

The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, Investigation Chapter, paragraph 419, VII,c) states as to the way the four great Elements condition each other
that one ``great primary'' conditions the other three, three condition
one, and two condition two.

Every day we experience a great variety of sense objects, but they are,
in fact, only different compositions of rūpa elements. When we touch a
table or a piece of cloth, tangible object may appear, such as hardness
or softness. Hardness, softness, heat, cold, motion or pressure can be
experienced by touch @footnote{The element of cohesion cannot be
experienced by touch.}. We think that tangible object can last, but it
is only rūpa which arises and falls away all the time. 

As to the third class of phenomena mentioned in relation to
conascence-condition, the paṭisandhi-citta arising in the five-khandha
planes (where there are nāma and rūpa) and the rūpa which is the
heart-base for the paṭisandhi-citta condition one another by way of
conascence. 

In the planes where there are nāma and rūpa, each citta needs a physical
base (vatthu) or place of origin. The vatthu for seeing is the
eye-base, and each of the sense-cognitions (the five pairs,
pañca-viññāṇas, of which one is kusala vipākacitta and one akusala
vipākacitta) has its corresponding base. The cittas other than the
sense-cognitions have the heart-base as their vatthu. During life the
rūpa which is the vatthu has to arise before the citta which is
dependant on it since rūpa is too weak at its arising moment to
function as base. However, at the moment of rebirth, citta and its
physical base arise at the same time. At that moment kamma produces the
heart-base at the same time as the paṭisandhi-citta which is the mental
result of kamma, vipākacitta, and this citta arises at the heart-base.
In the planes where there are nāma and rūpa the paṭisandhi-citta and
the heart-base cannot arise without one other. They condition one
another by way of conascence. 

The heart-base is not the only rūpa produced by kamma at the first
moment of our life. Kamma produces at that moment three groups of rūpa:
one group with the heart-base, one group with the bodybase and one
group with sex, masculinity or femininity. In each of these groups the
eight inseparable rūpas @footnote{The four Great Elements and in
addition: colour, odour, flavour and nutritive essense. These eight are
present in each group of rūpas.} and life-faculty (jīvitindriya)
@footnote{This rūpa is present in all groups produced by kamma, not in
groups produced by citta, temperature or nutrition. It only arises with
rūpas of the body, not with external materiality.} are included as
well, and thus, at the moment of our birth, three groups of ten rūpas
produced by kamma arise. Without the paṭisandhi-citta these groups
could not arise at that moment. Thus, the paṭisandhi-citta is
conascence-condition for the three groups of rūpas produced by kamma,
but only the heart-base among these rūpas is conascence-condition for
the paṭisandhi-citta; this citta could not arise without the
heart-base. 

As to the fourth class of phenomena mentioned in relation to
conascence-condition, citta and its accompanying cetasikas condition
the rūpa produced by them by way of conascence-condition. 

Citta produces rūpa at its arising moment. Each moment of citta can be
divided into three extremely short periods (Visuddhimagga XX, 26): the
moment of its arising (uppāda khaṇa), the moment of presence (tiṭṭhikhaṇa) and the moment of dissolution (bhaṅga khaṇa). Citta can only produce
rūpa at its arising moment, since it is too weak to do so at the moment
of its presence and of its dissolution. Sixteen types of citta do not
produce rūpa. They are: the paṭisandhi-citta, the sense-cognitions (the
five pairs of seeing, hearing, etc.), the four arūpāvacara vipākacittas
(of immaterial jhāna, arising in the arūpa-brahma-planes where there is
no rūpa) and the dying-consciousness, cuti-citta, of the arahat. Apart
from these cittas, all the other cittas produce rūpas of the body
@footnote{As we have seen, rūpas of the body can be produced by four
factors: by kamma, citta, nutrition and temperature.}. Akusala cittas
and kusala cittas can, for example, produce bodily intimation (gestures
by which we express our intentions) and speech intimation. Akusala
cittas and kusala cittas can produce bodily features by which our moods
are expressed, such as regret, anger or enjoyment. Dosa can produce
frowns and lobha can produce laughter. When we decorate our house, when
we dress ourselves or when we use cosmetics, do we realize which types
of citta produce rūpas while we move our hands? We may not even realize
that lobha-mūla-cittas produce rūpas at such moments. We cannot force
ourselves to lead the life of a monk, a life without sense-pleasures,
but through the Buddha's teaching of the Vinaya, the Suttanta and the
Abhidhamma we can come to know the defilements that arise. It is
instructive also for laypeople to read the ``Vinaya'', the Book of
Discipline for the monks, because it is a faithful mirror and a
constant reminder of the different defilements which arise in daily
life and are usually not known. We read in the ``Vinaya'' that it is
forbidden to monks to decorate dwellings and objects they use, or to
beautify themselves, since that is indulgence in sense-pleasures. The
text of the ``Vinaya'' (Book of Discipline V, Cullavagga, Ch V, 106)
states:


@quotation

``Now at that time the group of six monks anointed their faces, they
rubbed (paste) into their faces, they powdered their faces with chunam,
they smeared their faces with red arsenic, they painted their limbs,
they painted their faces, they painted their limbs and faces. People
spread it about, saying, ‘Like householders who enjoy pleasures of the
senses'@enddots{}''

@end quotation



We then read that the Buddha did not allow it and said that it would be
an offence of wrong-doing if monks would do any of those things. 

The ``Book of Analysis''(Vibhaṇga, second Book of the Abhidhamma, Ch 17,
Analysis of Small Items, paragraph 854) reminds us that it is vanity to
decorate objects or one's body:

@quotation


``Therein, what is ‘personal vanity'? Decoration of the robes, decoration
of the alms-bowl, decoration of the abode; the decoration, beautifying,
taking pride in, adorning, cupidity, state of cupidity, act of personal
vanity, personal vanity for this putrid body and for the external
requisites. This is called personal vanity.''

@end quotation



Laypeople still have conditions for a life with sense-pleasures, but
right understanding of the realities which arise can be developed. Also
while one adorns oneself, nāma and rūpa appear and there can be
awareness of them. If we know that, in such cases, rūpa is conditioned
by citta by way of conascence, it can help us to understand nāma and
rūpa as conditioned elements. 

Citta and cetasikas which produce rūpa at their arising moment condition
rūpa by way of conascence, but mind-produced rūpa, such as speech
intimation, does not reciprocally condition citta by way of conascence.
The arising of citta does not depend on mind-produced rūpa. 

As to the fifth group mentioned in relation to conascence-condition, the
four Great Elements condition the derived rūpas (upādāya rūpas) by way
of conascence, but the derived rūpas do not reciprocally condition the
four Great Elements by way of conascence. There are twentyeight kinds
of rūpa in all, and the ``derived rūpas'' are the twenty-four kinds of
rūpa other than the four Great Elements of solidity, cohesion,
temperature and motion. The derived rūpas are dependant on the four
Great Elements, they cannot arise without them. When sound, for
instance, arises, it needs solidity, cohesion, temperature and motion.
We are attached to the body and to our possessions, but these are only
rūpas, the four Great Elements and derived rūpas in different
compositions, arising because of conditions. 

There is a sixth group of phenomena mentioned in the same section of the
``Analytical Exposition''of the ``Paṭṭhāna'' concerning
conascence-condition, but this is actually a further explanation of the
relation of the heart-base to the citta which arises at the heart-base.
Throughout life the heart-base has to arise before the citta which is
dependant on it. Also the sense-bases which are the physical bases for
the sense-cognitions such as seeing or hearing, which arise throughout
life, have to arise previously to the cittas which are dependant on
them. Rūpa, at its arising moment is too weak to be base, and
therefore, it can perform the function of base only after it has
arisen. However, the moment of rebirth is the first moment of life and
in that case kamma produces the heart-base and the paṭisandhi-citta
which is dependant on it simultaneously. At that moment the
paṭisandhi-citta and the heart-base condition one another by way of
conascence. The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (II, Analytical Exposition, 6, VI) states
about the relation between heart-base and the citta which is dependant
on it as follows:


@quotation

``The material states (rūpa-dhammas) are sometimes related to the
immaterial states (nāma-dhammas) by conascence-condition and are
sometimes not related by conascence-condition.'' 

@end quotation



Some of the phenomena which are related by conascence-condition are also
related by mutuality-condition (aññamañña-paccaya). They condition one
another reciprocally while they arise simultaneously. The realities
that condition one another mutually, can, each of them, be in turn
conditioning dhamma (paccaya) and conditioned dhamma (paccayupanna
dhamma). We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XVII, 78):


@quotation

``A state that assists by means of mutual arousing and consolidating is a
mutuality-condition, as three sticks of a tripod give each other
consolidating support.''

@end quotation



Three sticks which are leaning against each other at the upper ends
mutually support one another. Evenso the realities to which
mutuality-condition pertains condition one another reciprocally. There
are three classes of phenomena to which this condition pertains. 

As to the first class, the four nāmakkhandhas which condition one
another by way of conascence, also condition one another by way of
mutuality. They support and consolidate one another. 

As to the second class, the four Great Elements which are related to one
another by conascence-condition are also related to one another by way
of mutuality-condition. Solidity, cohesion, temperature and motion
which arise together condition one another reciprocally and give each
other mutual support. 

As to the third class, the paṭisandhi-citta with the accompanying
cetasikas and the heart-base arising simultaneously condition one
another by way of mutuality. As we have seen, at the moment of rebirth
kamma produces, apart from the group of rūpas with the heart-base, two
other groups, namely the group with the body-base and the group with
sex. There is no relation of mutuality between the latter two groups
and the paṭisandhi-citta. 

The other classes of phenomena which are related by conascence are not
related by mutuality. The rūpa produced by citta is conditioned by that
citta by way of conascence, but there is no relation of mutuality. That
rūpa does not, in its turn, condition citta, it does not consolidate
citta by way of mutuality-condition. The four Great Elements are
conascent-condition for the derived rūpas, but there is no relation of
mutuality; the derived rūpas do not consolidate the four Great Elements
by way of mutuality-condition. Visible object or sound, which are
derived rūpas, cannot arise without the four Great Elements, but the
four Great Elements are not dependant on these rūpas. Thus we see that
phenomena which are related by mutuality are also related by
conascence, but that not all phenomena which are related by conascence
are also related by mutuality. 










@node Dependence-Condition

@chapter Dependence-Condition 




The dependence-condition, nissaya-paccaya, refers to realities which
condition other realities by being their support or foundation. We read
in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XVII, 79) about dependence-condition, which is
here translated as support-condition:


@quotation

``A state (dhamma) that assists in the mode of foundation and in the mode
of support is a support-condition, as the earth is for trees, as canvas
is for paintings, and so on.'' 

@end quotation



This type of condition refers to phenomena which are conascent (arising
together) with the phenomena they condition as well as to phenomena
which have arisen previously to the phenomena they condition. 

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Analytical Exposition, 8) as to the
dependence-condition for conascent phenomena:


@quotation

``1. The four immaterial khandhas are mutually related to one another by
dependence-condition.

2. The four great Elements are mutually related to one another by
dependence-condition. 

3. At the moment of conception, nāma and rūpa are mutually related to
one another by dependence-condition.

4. States, citta and cetasikas, are related to mind-produced rūpa by
dependence condition.

5. The four Great Elements condition the derived rūpas by
dependence-condition.''

@end quotation



As to the first class, the four nāmakkhandhas are mutually related to
one another by conascent dependence-condition: citta and cetasikas
always arise together and they are depending on one another. Citta
cannot arise without cetasikas and cetasikas cannot arise without
citta. As we have seen, they are also related to one another by way of
conascence, sahajāta, and by way of mutuality, aññamañña. 

The teaching of dependence-condition, nissaya paccaya, reminds us that
citta and cetasikas need one another to perform their functions. Citta
is the ``chief'' in cognizing an object, and cetasikas share the same
object while they perform each their own function. Feeling, vedanā, and
remembrance, saññā, are cetasikas which arise with each citta. Citta is
different from cetasika, it does not feel or remember; citta cognizes
or knows the object. Through awareness and right understanding
developed in vipassanā the difference between citta and cetasika can
gradually be known. Without awareness and right understanding there
will only be theoretical knowledge of the way citta and cetasika
condition each other by dependence-condition. 

When lobha-mūla-citta arises it is dependent on the accompanying
cetasikas. The roots of moha and lobha condition that citta and the
other cetasikas by way of root-condition, hetu-paccaya, and also by way
of dependence-condition, nissaya-paccaya. Ignorance and attachment are
a support for the lobha-mūla-citta. Chanda, desire-to-do, and viriya,
energy, also accompany the lobha-mūla-citta and they are
dependence-condition for this citta. Chanda can be
predominance-condition, adhipati-paccaya, for the citta and cetasikas
it accompanies while one tries to acquire something one clings to.
Lobha-mūla-citta just cognizes the desirable object which presents
itself, it needs chanda to accomplish something, such as acquiring the
object. Viriya can also be predominant when one tries to obtain
something. 

When kusala citta arises, it is dependent on alobha, non-attachment, and
adosa, non-aversion, and also on other cetasikas. It needs for example
chanda and viriya for the performance of dāna, the observance of sīla
or the development of right understanding. Each of the accompanying
cetasikas which performs its own task supports citta and conditions it
by way of dependence-condition. 

As to the second class, the four great Elements which are the rūpas of
solidity, cohesion, temperature and motion, condition one another by
way of conascent dependence-condition, sahajāta-nissaya-paccaya. They
are a support for one another. Solidity cannot arise without cohesion,
temperature and motion, and this is also true for the other three great
Elements. They also condition one another by way of
conascence-condition, sahajāta-paccaya, and mutuality-condition,
aññamañña-paccaya. 

As to the third class, at the moment of birth the paṭisandhi-citta and
the hadaya-vatthu (heart-base) are mutually related to one another by
way of dependence. In the planes where there are five khandhas, nāma
and rūpa, kamma produces the rūpa which is heart-base at the same time
as the paṭisandhi-citta which arises at the heart-base. The
paṭisandhi-citta and the heart-base support each other and they cannot
arise without each other. They are also related by way of conascence,
sahajāta and by way of mutuality, aññamañña.

As to the fourth class, citta and cetasikas are related to mind-produced
rūpa by way of dependence-condition. As we have seen, citta is one of
the four factors which produce rūpas of the body. Citta and its
accompanying cetasikas are a support to the rūpa produced by them, but
that rūpa does not reciprocally condition the citta and cetasikas by
way of dependence. When we, for example, speak kind words, the rūpa
which is speech intimation is conditioned by kusala citta and
accompanying cetasikas by way of dependence-condition. If there are no
conditions for the arising of kusala citta it is impossible to speak
kindly. 

As to the fifth class, the four great Elements condition the derived
rūpas (upāda rūpas, the rūpas other than the four great Elements
@footnote{There are twentyeight types of rūpa in all. Apart from the
four great Elements there are twenty-four rūpas which are the derived
rūpas. Among them are for example colour, odour, flavour, nutritive
essence, the eye-base, the other sense-bases and the heart-base.}) by
way of dependence-condition, but the opposite does not apply. Odour is
a derived rūpa. It cannot arise by itself, it needs solidity, cohesion,
heat and motion. When odour is experienced through the nose, only odour
appears, the other rūpas which arise together with it in one group are
not experienced. Visible object which is experienced through the eyes
and sound which is experienced through the ears need the four great
Elements as a foundation, they are conditioned by them by way of
dependence. 

Some phenomena which condition other phenomena by way of dependence have
arisen previously to the phenomena they condition and, at that moment,
they have not fallen away yet. These are the rūpas which serve as
vatthus or bases for the cittas they condition. They cannot be base at
their arising moment since they are then too weak. Rūpa can perform the
function of vatthu only at the moment of its presence @footnote{Rūpa
lasts as long as seventeen moments of citta. After its arising moment
it lasts sixteen more moments, fifteen moments of its presence and then
there is its dissolving moment.}. Thus, it must be prenascent, arisen
previously to the citta it conditions by dependence-condition. As we
have seen, only at the moment of birth the heart-base arises together
with the paṭisandhi-citta and serves as its base, but throughout life
it arises previously to the cittas for which it serves as base and it
conditions them by way of prenascent dependence-condition @footnote{
The vatthus are during life for the cittas they condition a
base-prenascence-dependence-condition, vatthu-purejāta-nissaya-paccaya.
}. We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' ( Analytical Exposition, 8. Dependence
Condition):

@quotation


``(vi )Eye-base is related to eye-consciousness element and its
associated states by dependence-condition.

( vii) Ear-base is related to ear-consciousness element and its
associated states by dependence-condition.

(viii) Nose-base is related to nose-consciousness element and its
associated states by dependence-condition.

(ix) Tongue-base is related to tongue-consciousness element and its
associated states by dependence-condition.

(x) Body-base is related to body-consciousness element and its
associated states by dependence-condition.''


@end quotation


 The five sense-bases have to arise previously to the corresponding
sense-cognitions they condition by way of dependence-condition. The
previously arisen eyebase is related to seeing-consciousness and the
accompanying cetasikas by way of prenascent dependence-condition.
Without eyesense, which serves as physical base and doorway, seeing
could not arise. The eyebase itself is also conditioned, it is produced
by kamma, and it lasts only seventeen moments of citta, which is
extremely short. 

The body-base is all over the body and inside it, except in the hairs or
tips of the nails. It is one of the conditions for experiencing tactile
object. It arises and falls away. We cling to the notion of ``my eyes'',
``my ears'', ``my bodysense'', but they are only rūpas produced by kamma
which fall away immediately. 

The following sutta reminds us of the fact that conditioned realities
are impermanent. They arise because of other conditioned realities that
are impermanent and therefore, they also have to fall away. Eyesense
and seeing, earsense and hearing are impermanent and not self. We read
in the ``Kindred Sayings'' (IV, Sa@udotaccent{l}āyatana vagga, Third Fifty, Ch 4, The
Chapter on Devadaha, paragraph 139, The personal, by way of condition):


@quotation

``The eye, monks, is impermanent. Whatever condition, whatever cause
there be for the appearance of the eye, that also is impermanent. Owing
to impermanence the eye has come into being, monks. How could the eye
be permanent? 

(And it is the same with the other organs of sense).

The mind is impermanent@dots{} Owing to impermanence the mind has come into
being, monks. How could mind be permanent?

So seeing, the well-taught ariyan disciple is repelled by the eye@dots{}
tongue@dots{} mind. Being repelled he lusts not for it@dots{} so that he realizes,
‘for life in these conditions there is no hereafter.' '' 


@end quotation














@node Decisive Support-Condition (Part I)

@chapter Decisive Support-Condition (Part I)




Upanissaya-paccaya, which can be translated as decisive
support-condition or strong dependence-condition, occurs when a
phenomenon assists another phenomenon by being a powerful inducement
@footnote{The Pāli term upa means strong or powerful, and nissaya
means dependence or support.}. There are three kinds of
upanissaya-paccaya:

@itemize @minus

@item 
decisive support-condition of object, ārammaṇūpanissaya-paccaya

@item 
decisive support-condition of proximity, anantarūpanissaya-paccaya

@item 
natural decisive support-condition, pakatūpanissaya- paccaya

@end itemize

As to strong dependence or decisive support-condition of object, the
object is the paccaya, condition, for the citta which experiences it,
the paccayupanna dhamma, conditioned dhamma, and that object conditions
the citta by way of strong dependence. We see in the ``Paṭṭhāna''
(Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation Chapter, Strong Dependence, paragraph
423), that the objects which are the conditioning factors are the same
as in the case of object predominance-condition, ārammaṇādhipati
paccaya (see Ch 3), thus, they have to be desirable objects. The cittas
which are conditioned by way of decisive support of object are of the
same type as in the case of object predominance-condition. Thus, the
realities to which these two kinds of conditions pertain are the same,
but there is a difference in the conditioning force of object
predominance-condition and of decisive support-condition of object. In
the case of object predominance-condition the desirable object is
highly esteemed by the citta and cetasikas concerned so that they give
preponderance to it. In the case of decisive support-condition of
object the desirable object is a powerful inducement, a cogent reason,
for the arising of the citta and cetasikas concerned, which are
strongly dependent on that object. Desirable objects which are object
predominance-condition can also, at the same time, be decisive
support-condition of object, a powerful inducement for the arising of
the cittas concerned. Phenomena can be conditioned by several types of
conditions at the same time.

Certain objects cannot be object predominance-condition nor decisive
support-condition of object, because they are undesirable. Among them
is the type of body-consciousness which is akusala vipāka, accompanied
by painful feeling. The two types of dosa-mūla-citta (one unprompted
and one prompted) and the two types of moha-mūla-citta (one accompanied
by doubt and one accompanied by restlessness) are not desirable objects
and thus they cannot be decisive support-condition of object. The
akusala cetasikas which accompany dosa-mūla-citta, such as regret,
jealousy and stinginess, and those which accompany moha-mūla-citta are
not desirable either, thus, they cannot be decisive support-condition
of object. 

Kusala such as dāna or sīla can be object predominance-condition for
kusala citta which esteems and gives preponderance to the wholesome
deed one performed. The wholesome deed can at the same time also be
decisive support-condition of object, it can be a powerful inducement,
a cogent reason, for the arising again and again of kusala citta which
sees the benefit of kusala. 

Kusala can condition attachment or wrong view by way of object
predominance-condition, and it can also condition attachment and wrong
view by way of decisive support-condition of object. It is then a
powerful inducement for the arising of attachment and wrong view. 

Attachment can be object predominance-condition and also decisive
support-condition of object, a powerful inducement for the arising of
attachment again and again in the case of all those who have not
eradicated attachment. 

Akusala cannot be object predominance-condition nor decisive
support-condition of object for kusala citta, since kusala citta cannot
consider akusala with esteem and high regard. 

Desirable rūpas which are object predominance-condition can also be
decisive support-condition of object for lobha-mūla-citta. Beautiful
colours or delicious flavours are a powerful inducement for the arising
of lobha-mūla-citta wanting such objects again and again. As soon as
delicious food is on the tongue its flavour is irresistable for
attachment. Someone may highly regard the sound of music which is then
object predominance-condition for lobha-mūla-citta. The sound of music
can also be a decisive support-condition of object, a powerful
inducement for the arising again and again of lobha-mūla-citta, for
example, when someone dedicates his whole life to music. 

The rūpas of the five sense-bases, the heart-base and the sense objects
can be decisive support-condition of object for lobha-mūla-citta but,
just as in the case of object predominance-condition, they cannot be
decisive support-condition of object for kusala citta @footnote{See Ch
3. Kusala citta does not give preponderance, for example, to a pleasant
sense object; it is accompanied by detachment, alobha. Thus, it is not
strongly dependent on that rūpa as object.} . 

Only the rūpas which each have their own distinctive nature and are
produced by one of the four factors of kamma, citta, temperature or
nutrition, can be object predominance-condition as well as decisive
support-condition of object for lobha-mūla-citta @footnote{These are
sabhāva rūpas (see Ch 3), such as the four great Elements, the sense
objects and the sense organs. Asabhāva rūpas, rūpas which do not have
their own distinct nature, cannot be decisive support-condition.}. 

The objects which are decisive support-condition are a powerful
inducement, a cogent reason, for the arising of the cittas which
experience them. However, we should remember that there are also other
conditions for the arising of kusala cittas and of akusala cittas. It
depends on someone's accumulated inclinations whether he has ``wise
attention'' or ``unwise attention'' to an object. Which objects are
powerful inducements for the arising of kusala citta and which objects
for the arising of lobha-mūla-citta in our life? Most of the time we
are intent on acquiring pleasant objects for ourselves, objects which
can be a decisive support-condition for clinging. There can be
awareness of the realities which appear, also of clinging. We should
not ignore clinging or despise it as an object of awareness. It arises
naturally in our daily life because there are still conditions for its
arising. If we do not know its true nature, we will take it for self
and then it cannot be eradicated. 

Nibbāna is a lokuttara dhamma that is a decisive support-condition of
object for the cittas that experience it. We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna''
(Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation Chapter, Conditions, Positive,
Classification Chapter, Strong Dependence, paragraph 423), that nibbāna is
related to the eight lokuttara cittas which experience it and also to
mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā and mahā-kiriyacitta (of the
arahat) accompanied by paññā, by way of decisive support-condition of
object @footnote{There is one type of lokuttara kusala citta and one
type of lokuttara vipākacitta arising in the case of each of the four
stages of enlightenment, thus there are eight types of lokuttara citta.
The mahā-kusala citta preceding lokuttara citta also experiences
nibbāna. The cittas which review nibbāna, arising after the lokuttara
cittas have fallen away, are mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā or
mahā-kiriyacitta accompanied by paññā.}. 

Nibbāna and the lokuttara cittas which experience it cannot be object
predominance-condition for lobha-mūla citta, nor can they be decisive
support-condition of object for lobha-mūla-citta. 

As we have seen, the first condition classified under decisive
support-condition is decisive support-condition of object. The second
condition classified under decisive support-condition is decisive
support-condition of proximity, anantarūpanissaya-paccaya. This
condition is similar to proximity-condition. Each citta that arises and
falls away conditions the following citta by way of proximity-condition
without any interval (anantara-paccaya, see Ch 4). As to decisive
support-condition of proximity, this is also related to each preceding
citta which conditions the succeeding citta. However, a distinction
between these two conditions has to be made. The teaching of decisive
support-condition of proximity emphasizes the aspect of powerful
inducement of the conditioning force in the relationship between the
conditioning reality, the preceding citta, and the conditioned reality,
the succeeding citta. Citta can arise without being conditioned by way
of root-condition and other conditions, but not without being
conditioned by the preceding citta. Thus, the preceding citta as
conditioning factor is a powerful inducement or cogent reason for the
arising of the succeeding citta (see ``Visuddhimagga'', Ch. XVII, 82). 

The paṭisandhi-citta, for example, is a cogent reason for the succeeding
bhavanga-citta, so that life can continue. If the preceding citta would
not be a powerful inducement for the arising of the succeeding citta,
there could not be a continuous succession of cittas, even at this
moment. In the case of birth as an animal, the paṭisandhi-citta is
akusala vipākacitta, and this citta conditions the succeeding
bhavanga-citta by way of proximity decisive-support-condition. The
bhavanga-citta is the same type of citta as the paṭi-sandhi-citta, it
could not change into kusala vipākacitta. Birth as an animal is
different from birth as a human being, and the bhavanga-citta which
succeeds the paṭisandhi-citta in the case of these different kinds of
births is the same type of vipākacitta as the paṭisandhi-citta. We can
notice that the lives of animals and of human beings are completely
different. Beings are born with different potentialities, different
capabilities, and these are carried on to the succeeding bhavanga-citta
and then to the following cittas which arise in succession throughout
life. In between the processes of cittas there are bhavanga-cittas, and
they are of the same type as the paṭisandhi-citta. 

Each citta which arises falls away immediately, but it has a
conditioning force which is a powerful inducement for the arising of
the succeeding citta without any interval. Thus, good and bad qualities
can be carried on from moment to moment, they can be accumulated.
Attachment has been accumulated from life to life. We think time and
again with attachment about honour and all the pleasant things we want
to obtain for ourselves. We have an interest in the Dhamma because this
has been accumulated. We may have listened to the Dhamma in past lives,
but we do not remember this anymore. Interest in the Dhamma and also
the inclination to develop right understanding can be carried on from
life to life because of proximity decisive support-condition. 

In the development of vipassanā, insight, awareness can arise of
whatever reality appears at the present moment. Because of
proximity-condition and of proximate decisive support-condition citta
arises and falls away and is then succeeded by the next citta. At one
moment seeing arises, at another moment attachment to visible object,
at another moment again hearing or attachment to sound. Nobody can
choose the object of awareness, because realities appear already
because of their own conditions. Cittas which arise in a process of
cittas do so according to a fixed order which cannot be changed. Each
preceding citta is a powerful inducement for the arising of the next
citta. 

So long as we are in the cycle of birth and death there are conditions
for each citta to be succeeded by the next citta. The development of
right understanding of the different characteristics of realities as
they appear one at a time will eventually lead to the end of the cycle.
We confuse the different doorways of sense-doors and mind-door, we do
not clearly distinguish be-tween different cittas which experience one
object at a time through one doorway. Through the development of right
understanding one learns that the doorways and the realities which are
dependent on them are different. Seeing is completely different from
hearing, it arises because of different conditions, it experiences an
object different from the object which hearing experiences. The aim of
the study of the conditions for the realities which arise is the
understanding of the truth of non-self. 

We read in the ``Kindred Sayings''(IV, Sa@udotaccent{l}āyatana Vagga, Second Fifty, 5,
The Chapter of the Six, paragraph 94, Including the sixfold sense-sphere) that
the Buddha said that the lack of restraint of the six spheres of
contact (the five senses and the mind) leads to dukkha, whereas their
being well tamed, well watched, well restrained @footnote{We also read
in other parts of the teachings that the six doors are ``guarded''
through satipaṭṭhāna. Only right understanding of the reality which
appears can eventually eradicate defilements.}, leads to happiness. We
read in the verse:

@sp 1

@quotation
He meets with dukkha, monks, who has not tamed

The sixfold impact of the sphere of sense.

They who have learned the mastery of these,

With faith for comrade,- they dwell free from lust. 

@sp 1


Beholding with the eye delightful things

Or things unlovely, let him restrain his bent

To lust for loveliness, and let him not 

Corrupt his heart with thoughts of ``O, it is dear.''


@sp 1

And when, again, sounds sweet or harsh he hears,

Not led astray by sweetness, let him check

The error of his senses. Let him not

Corrupt his heart with thoughts of ``O, it is sweet.''


@sp 1

If some delightful fragrance meet the nose,

And then again some foul malodorous stench,

Let him restrain repugnance for that stench,

Nor yet be led by lust for what is sweet.

@sp 1


Should he taste savours that are sweet and choice,

And then again what is bitter to the tongue,

He should not greedily devour the sweet,

Nor yet show loathing for the bitter taste.

@sp 1


By pleasures' impact not inebriate,

Nor yet distracted by the touch of pain,

To pain and pleasure both indifferent

Let him be free from likings and dislikes.


@sp 1

Obsessed (by lusts) are others: so obsessed

They know and so they fare. But he dispels

All the world's vulgar fashionings of mind.

And treads the path renunciation-bound.


@sp 1

By contact of these six, if mind be trained,

The heart is never shaken any more.

Overcome these two, O monks,- lust and hate.

Do you pass beyond the bounds of birth and death.
@end quotation

@node Decisive Support-Condition (Part II)
@chapter Decisive Support-Condition (Part II)




As we have seen, there are three kinds of decisive support-condition:
decisive support of object, ārammaṇūpanissaya-paccaya, decisive support
of proximity, anantarūpanissaya-paccaya, and natural decisive
support-condition, pakatūpanissaya-paccaya. 

With regard to the third decisive support-condition, the natural
decisive support-condition, pakatūpanissaya-paccaya, the Commentary to
the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (the Pañcappakaraṇatthakathā) explains the term ``pakata''
in pakatūpanissaya. Pakata means done properly, done thoroughly. Kusala
and akusala which were ``done thoroughly'', often performed, can become
firmly accumulated, they can become habitual. In this way they are a
cogent reason, a powerful inducement for the arising of kusala and
akusala later on, which are the dhammas conditioned by them, the
paccayupanna dhammas. Also external conditions, such as temperature,
food, dwelling place and friends one associates with can be cogent
reasons for the dhammas which they cause to arise. 

The Commentary defines in addition the term pakatūpanissaya, as natural
condition, explaining the word ``pakati'' which is connected with
``pakatūpanissaya'', as naturally, by nature. The conditioning factor
conditions the arising of other dhammas naturally, and it can condition
them without the assistance of decisive support-condition of object or
decisive support-condition of proximity. For example, when there is
strong confidence (saddhā) in kusala, this can be a cogent reason for
the arising of kusala citta later on, without the need to be dependent
on decisive support-condition of object or decisive support-condition
of proximity.

The ``Paṭṭhāna'' explains that kusala, which formerly arose, such as
confidence, sīla, the study of the Dhamma and generosity, are natural
decisive support-condition for their arising again, later on. We read
in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation Chapter,
Conditions Positive, paragraph 423,c, Natural strong dependence):


@quotation

``By the strong dependence of confidence@dots{} of precept (sīla)@dots{} of learning@dots{}
generosity@dots{} By the strong dependence of wisdom, (one) offers the
offering, undertakes the precept, fulfils the duty of observance,
develops jhāna, develops insight, develops Path, develops
superknowledge, develops attainment. Confidence, precept, learning,
generosity, wisdom is related to confidence, precept, learning,
generosity, wisdom, by strong dependence condition.''

@end quotation



Good and bad qualities accumulated in the past become our nature, they
condition the different cittas in the present life by way of natural
decisive support-condition. We read in the ``Mahā-Sutasoma Jātaka''
(Jātaka Stories V, no. 537) that the Buddha said that not only in his
present life he had tamed the robber Aṅgulimāla who had slain many
people but later on attained arahatship, but also in a former life when
the Buddha was King Sutasoma and Aṅgulimāla was the King of Bārāṇasī.
Once Aṅgulimāla's cook could not obtain meat and gave him, without
telling him, human flesh. We read (458):


@quotation

``@dots{} No sooner was a bit of the meat placed on the tip of the King's
tongue than it sent a thrill through the seven thousand nerves of taste
and continued to create a disturbance throughout his whole body. Why
was this? From his having previously resorted to this food@enddots{}''

@end quotation



His longing for human flesh became exceedingly strong, it determined his
whole life. He was unable to give up his craving, so he abandoned his
kingdom and kept on murdering for the sake of human flesh. He had
accumulated greed for human flesh because in his preceding life he had
been a man-eating Yakkha. His previous accumulations were the natural
decisive support-condition for the arising of greed for human flesh and
for his killing of human beings. He could not refrain from taking human
flesh. Thus we see that unwholesome deeds performed in the past are not
only capable of producing unpleasant results later on, but that they
can also be a natural decisive support-condition for the committing of
unwholesome deeds at the present. Akusala kamma is dangerous because
the tendency to akusala is accumulated to perform akusala kamma again.

We read in the same Jātaka that one day the King seized Sutasoma, the
Bodhisatta. Sutasoma asked permission to be temporarily released in
order to fulfill a promise he had made to a brahmin, and after he had
done so he returned to the man-eater without fear, and preached to him.
He said (491):
@sp 1

@quotation


``Of all the sweets this world can yield to me

None sweeter than the joys of Truth I see:

Brahmins and priests that in the Truth abide, 

Birth, death escaping, reach the further side.''

@end quotation

@sp 1

The Bodhisatta said that he was willing to give up all his wealth, his
limbs and his life for the sake of truth. He converted and tamed the
man-eater. The perfections (pāramīs) he had accumulated conditioned his
heroic attitude and his preference for the truth. 

The Bodhisatta developed all the perfections during countless lives in
order to attain Buddhahood. We may have accumulated an interest in the
Dhamma, but the perfections have not been accumulated to the degree
that the stages of insight can arise and that enlightenment can be
attained. Mindfulness of realities does not often arise; its arising
cannot be controlled by a ``self'', it is dependent on the right
conditions. Not only right understanding, but also other wholesome
qualities such as generosity, sīla, mettā and patience have to be
developed. They are sobhana cetasikas, beautiful mental factors, which
are saṇkhārakkhandha, the khandha of ``formations'' @footnote{All
cetasikas other than feeling and saññā, remembrance, are included in
saṅkhārakkhandha.}. The different factors of which this khandha is
composed mutually strengthen and support one another and they are
accumulated so that there will be conditions for enlightenment in the
future. 

In the process of cittas leading to enlightenment, paññā realizes the
true nature of the reality which appears, it realizes one of the three
characteristics of that reality, namely impermanence, dukkha or anattā.
Only one of these three characteristics is realized at that moment
because citta can have only one object at a time. However, before the
three characteristics of reality can be known as they are, right
understanding of all nāmas and rūpas which appear in daily life has to
be gradually developed, and moreover, the ``perfections'' have to be
accumulated. The accumulated perfections, paññā included, are the
natural strong dependence-condition for the complete abandoning of all
clinging to the wrong view of self when the first stage of
enlightenment, the stage of the sotāpanna, is reached. Lokuttara citta
cannot arise without the right conditions. 

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (under Strong Dependence, paragraph 423):

@quotation


``The preparation for the first Path @footnote{The magga-citta of the
first stage of enlightenment, the stage of the ``streamwinner'',
sotāpanna. There are four stages of enlightenment.} is related to the
first Path by (natural) strong dependence-condition.''
@end quotation




The same is said with regard to the second, third and fourth Path. More-
 over, the first Path is related to the second Path by natural strong
dependence, and it is the same with the subsequent Paths. 

The natural decisive support-condition, pakatūpanissaya paccaya,
includes many different aspects. Kusala citta that arose before can be
a natural decisive support-condition for akusala citta arising
afterwards; we may cling to the kusala we performed or we may have
conceit about it. We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' ( same section, paragraph 423, II
b):

@quotation

``Confidence, precept, learning, generosity, wisdom is related to lust,
hate, delusion, conceit, wrong views, wish, by (natural) strong
dependence-condition.''

@end quotation



Knowledge of the Dhamma may be a natural decisive support-condition for
conceit or for wrong view. Someone may have studied the Dhamma but he
may not consider nāma and rūpa appearing in daily life and have wrong
understanding of the practice of vipassanā. Or someone may have
confidence in a teacher who practises in the wrong way and thus he may
follow the wrong practice.

 Kusala can lead to aversion, it can be a natural decisive
support-condition for aversion. When we make an effort to help someone
else, that person may not appreciate our help and then we are likely to
have aversion. If we do not study the different conditions we may not
understand that the performing of good deeds can be a condition for the
arising of akusala citta. If we do not develop satipaṭṭhāna with the
purpose of eradicating akusala, the kusala we perform can, without our
noticing it, be a natural decisive support-condition for akusala citta.


Kusala citta can lead to bodily discomfort, which is akusala
vipākacitta. Someone may, for example, pay respect at the Buddhist holy
places in India, and this is a wholesome deed. However, the hotel where
he is staying may be dilapidated, without facilities, and this causes
him to suffer from heat, mosquitos and other discomforts. The
body-consciousness is in that case akusala vipāka produced by akusala
kamma. However, it is also conditioned by kusala kamma by way of
natural decisive support-condition. Phenomena which arise are not
merely conditioned by one type of condition but by several types. 

Accumulated unwholesome inclinations are a natural decisive
support-condition for the arising of akusala citta at the present time.
Accumulated dosa can lead to the killing of living beings. Also
accumulated lobha can lead to killing, for example, when one kills
because one wishes to have someone's property. At the moment of killing
there is dosa-mūla-citta, but lobha can motivate the deed, it can be a
natural decisive support-condition. 

When one commits one kind of akusala it can easily lead to the
committing of other types of akusala. We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna''( same
section, paragraph 423, IV, c): 


@quotation

``Killing is related to killing@dots{} stealing@dots{} unlawful intercourse with the
other sex@dots{} lying@dots{} slander@dots{} rude speech@dots{} foolish babble@dots{} avarice@dots{} ill-will@dots{} wrong views by strong dependence-condition.'' 

@end quotation



It is then explained that stealing and the other kinds of evil are
related to all kinds of akusala by way of decisive support-condition.
We may think that it is not very harmful to indulge in idle, useless
speech. However, this kind of speech can be a natural decisive
support-condition for lying, stealing, killing or other kinds of
akusala kamma.

Akusala can also be a natural decisive support-condition for kusala.
Because of aversion towards akusala vipāka or attachment to kusala
vipāka someone may perform good deeds. He may regret the akusala he
performed in the past and then, in order to counteract it, he performs
kusala. We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (same section, paragraph 423, V):


@quotation

``After having killed, (one) offers the offering, undertakes the precept,
fulfils the duty of observance, develops jhāna, develops insight,
develops Path, develops superknowledge, develops attainment, to
counteract it.''

@end quotation



The same is said with regard to other kinds of evil deeds, they can be a
natural decisive support-condition for kusala. 

When kamma produces result, it is kamma-condition for that result, and,
at the same time, it is also natural decisive support-condition, a
cogent reason for that result to be produced. We performed many kinds
of kamma also in past lives, and we do not know which kamma will
produce result at a particular moment. When at this moment vipākacitta
experiences a pleasant or an unpleasant object through one of the
senses we know that kamma is a cogent reason, a decisive
support-condition for such result. We are born in the human plane and
therefore, we know that kusala kamma has produced the paṭisandhi-citta.
Among the innumerable deeds done in the past that particular kamma has
been a powerful inducement, a natural decisive support-condition for
the paṭisandhi-citta. Kamma has by its own nature the power to cause
the arising of the appropriate result, even after countless lives: it
is kamma-condition as well as natural decisive support-condition for
that result. 

As we have seen, kusala kamma and akusala kamma performed in the past
are also a natural decisive support-condition for kusala kamma and
akusala kamma at the present time. Evenso by performing good or evil
deeds now, we accumulate the tendency to perform similar deeds later
on, thus, such actions are a natural decisive support-condition for
future deeds. 

The natural decisive support-condition comprises also vipāka which
conditions akusala citta or kusala citta. Vipāka conditions kusala
citta when, for example, we suffer bodily pain and we are then reminded
that life is short and that we should not delay the development of
right understanding. Vipāka conditions akusala citta when we have
aversion towards bodily pain. 

Kusala vipāka can be a condition for the arising of akusala vipāka later
on, and akusala vipāka for the arising of kusala vipāka later on by way
of natural decisive support-condition. Body-consciousness can be kusala
vipākacitta or akusala vipākacitta. A painful massage conditions
body-consciousness that is akusala vipākacitta, but it may lead to the
alleviation of pain and to bodily wellbeing later on. 

Natural decisive support-condition also comprises factors such as
climate, food, dwelling-place, family and friends. We can notice that
good and bad friends condition our spiritual progress or decline.
Someone may be in the company of bad friends who induce him to take
drugs or alcoholic drinks, but the same person may be at another time
with a good friend in the Dhamma who explains the teachings to him. It
depends on his accumulated inclinations whether he will continue to be
with the wrong friends or with the right friends. It is beneficial to
know our different accumulations and the different conditions which
play their part in our life.

We can experience that bodily health or sickness conditions our cittas.
Food, taken in the right amount, can be the condition for our ability
to develop right understanding. The Buddha, before his enlightenment,
fasted to the extent of becoming completed emaciated. He then
understood that he was not practising the Middle Way and he took
rice-gruel offered to him by Sujatā. On that day food was a natural
decisive support-condition for the development of the right Path
leading to his enlightenment. The right dwelling-place can also be a
natural decisive support-condition for one's spiritual progress. Out of
compassion the Buddha explained into the minutest details how
dwelling-places should be kept and cleaned. He thought of the
well-being of the monks. We read, for example, in the ``Vinaya'' (Book of
the Discipline V, Culla-vagga, Ch VIII, On Observances, 208) that a
monk should clear out an unoccupied dwelling-place and then clean it:

@quotation


``@enddots{} If there are cobwebs in the dwelling-place, he should first remove
them from the (floor-) covering. He should wipe the corners of the
window-holes. If a wall that was coloured red becomes stained, he
should wipe it having moistened a rag, having wrung it out. If ground
that was blackened becomes stained, he should wipe it having moistened
a rag, having wrung it out. If the ground has not been treated, he
should sweep it having sprinkled it all over with water, thinking:
‘Take care lest the dwelling-place is sullied with dust'. Having looked
for (any) rubbish, he should remove it to one side@enddots{}''


@end quotation


We may believe that thinking of concepts concerning the cleaning of our
house may hinder the practice of satipaṭṭhāna. We may be inclined to
think that while doing chores in our home there cannot be awareness of
nāma and rūpa. Both monks and laypeople have to perform tasks in their
daily lives and they have to pay attention to concepts, but there can
be awareness and understanding of thinking as a conditioned nāma and
there can also be awareness of other realities which appear. Seeing and
visible object appear time and again and in being aware of their
characteristics they can be known as they are. The Buddha exhorted the
monks very often to be aware during all their activities and even when
this was not always expressively mentioned, it was understood. When we
read about the monk‘s chores we can be reminded to be aware, also while
we are doing such tasks, just as the monks. 

A suitable climate is a natural decisive support-condition for the
development of paññā. We read in the Commentary to the ``Satipaṭṭhāna
Sutta'', the ``Papañcasūdanī'' @footnote{Middle Length Sayings I, no. 10.
The Sutta and Commentary are translated by Ven. Soma, in ``The Way of
Mindfulness'', B.P.S. Kandy.}, in the Introduction, about the reason
why the Buddha preached this sutta to the people of the Kurus: 


@quotation

``The inhabitants of the Kuru country- bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, upāsakas,
upāsikās (layfollowers)- by reason of their country being blessed with
a perfect climate and through their enjoyment of other comfortable
conditions were always healthy in body and in mind. They, happy with
healthy minds and bodies, and having the power of knowledge, were
capable of receiving deep teachings@enddots{}''


@end quotation


A suitable climate and other favorable circumstances were not the only
conditions for the people of Kuru to receive the teachings. They must
have listened to the Dhamma and accumulated understanding in the past. 

Oppressive weather and bad food can be a natural decisive
support-condition for dosa which may be so strong that it leads to
killing or the performing of other evil deeds. Habits such as going to
sleep and waking up at a particular time come to us naturally, they are
conditioned by way of natural decisive support. If we are not
negligent, sati can arise before going to sleep and also as soon as we
wake up. Someone who is indolent is bound to have attachment before he
goes to sleep and when he wakes up. We may regret that there is not
often sati before going to sleep and when we wake up, but when we have
more understanding of conditions we see that sati is anattā, that it
cannot arise at will. 

The place where someone is born and where he lives can be a natural
decisive support-condition for paññā. Birth in the human plane and in a
place where we can hear the Dhamma is rare. By the following sutta we
can be reminded not to waste any opportunity to develop right
understanding. We read in the ``Gradual Sayings'' (I, Book of the Ones,
Ch XIX, Trifling):


@quotation

``Even as, monks, in this Rose-apple Land trifling in number are the
pleasant parks, the pleasant groves, the pleasant grounds and lakes,
while more numerous are the steep precipitous places, unfordable
rivers, dense thickets of stakes and thorns, and inaccessible
mountains,- just so few in number are those beings that are born on
land: more numerous are the beings that are born in water. 

Just so few in number are the beings that are reborn among men: more
numerous are the beings that are born among others than men.

Just so few in number are those beings that are reborn in the middle
districts: more numerous are those reborn in the outlying districts,
among the undiscerning barbarians.

Just so few in number are those beings that are wise, quick-witted, not
deaf or dumb, competent to judge the meaning of what is spoken well or
ill: more numerous are those beings that are foolish, slow-witted, deaf
or dumb, incompetent to judge the meaning of what is spoken well or
ill.

Just so few in number are those beings that are possessed of the ariyan
eye of wisdom @footnote{The path, with insight.}: more numerous are
those sunk in ignorance and bewilderment. 

Just so few in number are those beings that get the chance of seeing a
Tathāgata @footnote{The ``Thus-gone'', epithet of the Buddha.}: more
numerous are they that do not. 

Just so few in number are those beings that welcome, when they hear it,
the Dhamma and Discipline set forth by a Tathāgata: more numerous are
they that do not.

Just so few in number are those beings, that, on hearing Dhamma, learn
it by heart: more numerous are they that do not.

Just so few in number are those beings that examine the meaning of the
doctrines they have learnt by heart@dots{} that, understanding the meaning
and understanding the doctrine, live in accordance with it@dots{} that are
stirred by stirring topics@dots{} that, being stirred, strive systematically@dots{}
that, making resolution their object, win concentration, win
one-pointedness of mind@dots{} that gain the best of food and condiments:
more numerous are they that do not, but just exist on gathered scraps
and food collected in a bowl. 

Just so few in number are those beings that are winners of the essence
of the meaning, the essence of Dhamma, the essence of release: more
numerous are those that do not.

Wherefore I say to you, monks, thus must you train yourselves: We will
become winners of the essence of the meaning, of the essence of Dhamma,
of the essence of release. That is how you must train yourselves.''


@end quotation


@node Prenascence and Postnascence-Condition 

@chapter Prenascence, Postnascence-Condition 




Phenomena can condition other phenomena by way of conascence
(sahajāta-paccaya), by way of prenascence (purejāta-paccaya) or by way
of postnascence (pacchajāta-paccaya). In the case of
conascence-condition, a conditioning phenomenon (paccaya dhamma) arises
together with the phenomenon it conditions (paccayupanna dhamma). In
the case of prenascence-condition, a phenomenon has arisen prior to the
phenomenon it conditions. In the case of postnascence-condition, a
phenomenon conditions another phenomenon which has arisen prior to
itself and has not fallen away yet. 

As to prenascence-condition, this is twofold:
base-prenascence-condition and object-prenascence-condition. 

The rūpas which are bases (vatthus) condition the cittas which are
dependent on them by way of prenascence, purejāta-paccaya. As we have
seen (in Ch 6), the rūpas which are the sense-bases condition the
cittas which are dependent on those bases by way of
dependence-condition, nissaya-paccaya. These realities, the rūpas which
are bases and the cittas which are dependent on them, are the same as
in the case of prenascence-dependence-condition. However, they are
treated separately under prenascence-condition with the purpose of
showing that the conditioning realities have arisen prior to the
conditioned realities. 

Seeing arises at the eye-base (cakkhu-vatthu). This rūpa which is the
eye-sense (cakkhu pasāda-rūpa) and which has the capacity to receive
visible object, is produced by kamma. Rūpa cannot function as base at
its arising moment, since it is then too weak. It can only function as
base after its arising moment, thus at the time when it is present. It
cannot be base either at its dissolution moment. Rūpa lasts longer than
citta. When we compare its duration with the duration of citta, rūpa
lasts as long as seventeen moments of citta @footnote{See Appendix 1
where it is explained that a sense object which is rūpa and which is
experienced by several cittas arising in a sense-door process lasts as
long as seventeen moments of citta. When we are more precise, we
can divide one moment of citta into three extremely short periods: its
arising moment (uppāda khaṇa), the moment of its presence (tiṭṭhi
khaṇa) and its dissolution moment (bhaṇga khaṇa). When we take these
three periods of citta into consideration, the duration of rūpa is,
compared to the duration of citta, three times seventeen, thus,
fiftyone moments. Rūpa has after its arising moment fortynine moments
of presence and then there is its dissolution moment.}. Thus, the
rūpa which can function as eye-base has to arise before
seeing-consciousness, and when seeing-consciousness arises it is still
present. Kamma keeps on producing this rūpa throughout our life, also
when seeing does not arise. It produces all the rūpas which can
function as base throughout life, there never is any lack of them. 

The eye-base (cakkhu-vatthu) is base only for seeing-consciousness, it
is not base for the other cittas arising in the eye-door process; these
have the heart-base (hadaya-vatthu) as their base. The previously
arisen ear-base conditions hearing-consciousness, thus, it conditions
it by way of prenascence-condition. The other sense-bases also
condition the cittas which are dependent on them after having
previously arisen, thus by way of prenascence-condition. We read in the
``Paṭṭhāna'' (II, Analytical Exposition of the Conditions, 10,
Prenascence-Condition):


@quotation



``Eye-base is related to eye-consciousness element and its associated
states @footnote{The associated dhammas are the accompanying
cetasikas.} by prenascence-condition.

Ear-base is related to ear-consciousness element and its associated
states by prenascence-condition.

Nose-base is related to nose-consciousness element and its associated
states by prenascence-condition.

Tongue-base is related to tongue-consciousness element and its
associated states by prenascence-condition.

Body-base is related to body-consciousness element and its associated
states by prenascence-condition.''

@end quotation

It seems that seeing, hearing or thinking occur all at the same time,
but they arise at different moments, they are dependent on different
bases and they experience different objects. When we study the manifold
conditions for the realities which arise it will be clearer that there
is no self who coordinates all the different experiences. The above
quoted text reminds us that seeing, hearing and the other
sense-cognitions are only elements, not self. In being mindful of one
reality at a time, visible object, sound and the other sense objects
can be clearly distinguished from each other. It will be more clearly
understood that eye-sense is different from ear-sense and the other
senses. As right understanding develops we shall be less inclined to
confuse the different realities and to take them for a ``whole'', for a
person. 

The heart-base is the base for all the cittas other than the five pairs
of sense-cognitions (seeing, hearing, etc., which are either kusala
vipāka or akusala vipāka), and it conditions them by way of
prenascence-condition. Only at the moment of rebirth the heart-base
conditions the paṭisandhi-citta by way of conascence-condition,
sahajāta paccaya. At that moment kamma produces the paṭisandhi-citta
and the heart-base simultaneously (see Ch 5). We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna
(same section as the above quoted text, XII) where the heart-base is
referred to as ``this matter'' :


@quotation

``Depending on this matter, mind-element and mind-consciousness- element
arise; that matter is related to mind-element and its associated states
by prenascence-condition; is sometimes related to
mind-consciousness-element and its associated states by
prenascence-condition, and is sometimes not related by
prenascence-condition.''
@end quotation



Mind-element, mano-dhātu, includes the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta,
five-sense-door adverting-consciousness, and the two types of
sampaṭicchana-citta, receiving-consciousness, which are kusala vipāka
and akusala vipāka. Mind-consciousness-element, mano-viññāṇa-dhātu,
includes the cittas other than the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas (two pairs of
sense-cognitions) and the cittas classified as mind-element. Thus, the
mind-consciousness element which is not conditioned by heart-base by
way of prenascence, as referred to in the text, is the
paṭisandhi-citta. This citta is conditioned by heart-base by way of
conascence. 

It is of no use to speculate where the heart-base is, but we should know
that cittas do not arise outside the body. In the planes of existence
where there are five khandhas, that is to say, nāma and rūpa, each
citta needs a physical base or place of origin, and these are the five
sense-bases and the heart-base. This reminds us of the interdependence
of nāma and rūpa from birth to death. 

As regards object-prenascence-condition, ārammaṇa-purejāta-paccaya, this
refers to rūpa which can be object of citta. Since rūpa is weak at its
arising moment, it can only be experienced by citta during the moments
of its presence. Thus, rūpa which is object of citta has arisen
previously to that citta; it conditions that citta by way of
prenascence. Visible object which impinges on the eyesense is not
experienced immediately; there are first bhavanga-cittas @footnote{
Life-continuum. The bhavanga-cittas experience the same object as the
paṭisandhi-citta. They do not experience the objects which impinge time
and again on the six doors.}, and then the eye-door
adverting-consciousness arises which is the first citta of the eye-door
process which experiences visible object. This citta arises at the
heart-base which has previously arisen and which conditions the citta
by way of base-prenascence-condition. It is succeeded by
seeing-consciousness which arises at the eye-base and then by other
cittas of the eye-door process which arise at the heart-base. Both base
and sense object condition the cittas by way of prenascence. It is the
same for the cittas which experience sense-objects through the other
sense-doors @footnote{Rūpa does not condition nāma by way of
prenascence-condition in the four arūpa-brahma planes since there is no
rūpa in those planes. Birth in the arūpa-brahma planes is the result of
arūpa-jhāna. Those who see the disadvantage of rūpa cultivate
arūpa-jhāna. Neither does prenascence-condition occur in the
asaññā-satta plane, the plane of non-percipient beings, where there is
no nāma. Birth in that plane is the result of rūpa-jhāna.}. We read in
the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Analytical Exposition, same section as quoted above)
about the object-prenascence-condition. Visible object is here referred
to as ``visible object-base'', and the same for the other sense objects.
The text states:
@quotation

``Visible object-base is related to eye-consciousness element and its
associated states by prenascence-condition.

Sound-base is related to ear-consciousness element and its associated
states by prenascence-condition.

Odour-base is related to nose-consciousness element and its associated
states by prenascence-condition.

Taste-base is related to tongue-consciousness element and its associated
states by prenascence-condition.

Tangible object-base is related to body-consciousness element and its
associated states by prenascence-condition.

Visible object-base, sound-base, odour-base, taste-base, tangible
object-base is related to mind-element and its associated states by
prenascence-condition.''

@end quotation



By the development of satipaṭṭhāna we can prove that our life consists
of nāma and rūpa arising because of conditions. Nāma experiences an
object and rūpa does not know anything. When seeing appears there can
be awareness of its characteristic so that it can be understood as a
reality, an element which experiences visible object through the
eye-door. When awareness arises of the reality which appears through
the eyedoor, it can be understood as an element which does not know
anything, which does not see, feel or remember. Realities appear
through the six doors time and again and when right understanding
develops, nāma can be known as nāma and rūpa as rūpa, and in this way
their different characteristics will be distinguished. When we are
eating there is flavour and tasting, when we touch something there is
tangible object and body-consciousness. When these realities appear and
awareness arises there is no need to think of sense-bases, sense
objects or any other terms we have learnt from the texts. In being
mindful of the characteristics of realities as they appear one at a
time, we shall be able to verify the truth that all phenomena which
appear are dhammas devoid of self. 

We read in the ``Kindred Sayings'' (IV, Sa@udotaccent{l}āyatana-vagga, Part I, First
Fifty, paragraph 1):

@quotation


``Thus have I heard: - The Exalted One was once staying near Sāvatthī, at
Jeta Grove, in Anāthapiṇ@udotaccent{d}ika's Park. Then the Exalted One addressed the
monks, saying: - ‘Monks.' 

‘Lord,' responded those monks to the Exalted One.

The Exalted One spoke thus: - ‘The eye, monks, is impermanent. What is
impermanent, that is dukkha. What is dukkha, that is void of the self.
What is void of the self, that is not mine; I am not it; it is not my
self. That is how it is to be regarded with perfect insight of what it
really is.

The ear@dots{} the nose@dots{} the tongue@dots{} the body@dots{} the mind is impermanent. What
is impermanent, that is dukkha. What is dukkha, that is void of the
self. What is void of the self, that is not mine; I am not it; it is
not my self. That is how it is to be regarded with perfect insight of
what it really is. So seeing, monks, the well-taught ariyan disciple is
repelled by eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being repelled by
them, he lusts not for them. Not lusting, he is set free. In this
freedom comes insight of being free. Thus he realizes: - Rebirth is
destroyed, lived is the righteous life, done is the task, for life in
these conditions there is no hereafter.' ''


@end quotation


We read in the same section (paragraph 4):

@quotation


``Visible objects, sounds, scents, savours, things tangible@dots{} mind-states
(dhammas) are impermanent@dots{} what is impermanent, that is dukkha. What is
dukkha, that is void of the self. What is void of the self, that is not
mine; I am not it; it is not my self. That is how it is to be regarded
with perfect insight of what it really is.

So seeing, monks, the well-taught ariyan disciple is repelled by visible
objects, by sounds, scents, savours, things tangible. He is repelled by
mind-states. Being repelled by them, he lusts not for them. Not
lusting, he is set free. In this freedom comes insight of being free.
Thus he realizes: ‘Rebirth is destroyed. Lived is the righteous life,
done is the task, for life in these conditions there is no hereafter.' '' 

@end quotation


Clinging to the belief that persons and things exist and that we can own
them causes a great deal of suffering. The ``worldly conditions'' of gain
and loss, honour and dishonour, praise and blame, wellbeing and misery
change all the time. Loss, sickness and death can occur quite suddenly;
they are beyond control, but we tend to forget the truth. We cannot
expect immediately to have less clinging to people and things. Even the
sotāpanna, the person who has attained the first stage of enlightenment
and who has no more wrong view of self, still has attachment and
sadness. Only the arahat has eradicated all kinds of clinging. However,
when we read the Tipiṭaka we can appreciate the numerous reminders of
the truth that there is no person, only different elements which are
devoid of self. These texts remind us of the truth and they can give us
confidence to begin to develop the Path in order to see the realities
of our life as elements which arise because of their appropriate
conditions and are beyond control. 

As to postnascence-condition, pacchajāta-paccaya, citta and its
accompanying cetasikas support the rūpas of the body which have arisen
previously and have not fallen away yet. Thus, in this way citta
conditions these rūpas by way of postnascence-condition. Citta does not
cause the arising of the rūpas it conditions by way of postnascence,
these rūpas have arisen already prior to the citta; it supports and
consolidates these rūpas which are still present, since rūpa lasts as
long as seventeen moments of citta.

Citta is postnascence-condition for the previously arisen rūpas of the
body which have been produced by the four factors of kamma, citta,
temperature and nutrition and which have not fallen away yet. Citta
supports and consolidates these rūpas. The paṭisandhi-citta cannot be
postnascence-condition, since there is no previously arisen rūpa at the
first moment of life. At the first moment of life kamma produces rūpas
simultaneously with the paṭisandhi-citta, but after that, throughout
our life, citta is postnascence-condition for the previously arisen
rūpas of the body. The five pairs of sense-cognitions do not produce
rūpa, but they condition the previously arisen rūpas of the body by way
of postnascence, they consolidate these @footnote{The cittas which
produce rūpa condition their arising by way of conascence-condition and
dependence-condition, see Ch 5 and 6. As explained, the five
sense-cognitions of seeing, hearing, etc., do not produce rūpas, but
they consolidate the rūpas which have been produced before by one of
the four factors.}. The arūpāvara vipākacittas @footnote{These
cittas are the results of arūpa-jhāna and they perform the function of
rebirth and of bhavanga.} which arise in the arūpa-brahma planes
cannot be postnascence-condition, since there is no rūpa in those
planes. 

In the case of base and object which are prenascence-condition, rūpa
conditions nāma, whereas in the case of postnascence-condition nāma
conditions rūpa. The teaching of prenascence-condition,
purejāta-paccaya, conascence-condition, sahajāta-paccaya, and
postnascence-condition, pacchajāta-paccaya, reminds us of the intricacy
of the relationship between different phenomena. Seeing, for example,
is the result of kamma and it is dependent on the previously arisen
eye-base which is also produced by kamma. Seeing experiences visible
object which has previously arisen but which does not last longer than
seventeen moments of citta. There is no self who could arrange for
seeing to find its proper base; the eye-base has previously arisen and
is already there when seeing arises. There is no self who could fetch
visible object at the right moment so that seeing can see it and the
other cittas of the eye-door process can also experience it, before it
falls away. Visible object arises together in a group of rūpas
including the four Great Elements and these condition it by way of
dependence-condition, nissaya-paccaya, and by conascence-condition,
sahajāta-paccaya, but seeing does not experience the other rūpas which
arise together with visible object; it only sees visible object, that
is, what appears through eyesense. Several conditions coincide and this
makes it possible for seeing to arise at the eye-base and to see
visible object. We take the experiences which occur time and again in
our daily life for granted, but they all are dependent on several
conditions, they are interrelated in different ways. Cittas and the
rūpas of the body are interrelated, they need one another. Seeing and
all other cittas support and consolidate the rūpas of the body which
have already arisen, they condition them by way of post-nascence. The
different conditions for the phenomena of our life are operating right
at this moment.

Shortly before death kamma does not produce the heart-base anymore. The
cittas arising shortly before death are depending on one last
heart-base and this ceases with the ceasing of the dying-consciousness.
At the simultaneous arising of the heart-base and citta, birth occurs
and at the simultaneous ceasing of the heart-base and citta, death
occurs. The dying-consciousness produces rūpa (except in the case of
the arahat) and these rūpas last only seventeen moments of citta. At
death, also nutrition ceases to produce rūpa and only temperature,
which produces rūpas both in the body and in dead matter, keeps on
producing rūpas of the corpse that is left. All this reminds us of the
frailty of life which consists of only nāma and rūpa depending on
conditions.










 



@node Repetition-Condition 
@chapter Repetition-Condition 




Repetition-condition, āsevana-paccaya, pertains only to nāma, namely to
the javana-cittas arising in a process of cittas. Javana-cittas are
kusala, akusala or, in the case of arahats, kiriya. With regard to
cittas of the sense-sphere, kāmāvacara cittas, there are usually seven
javana-cittas in a process of cittas and these are all of the same
jāti, kusala, akusala or kiriya @footnote{Cittas can be of four jātis,
or classes, namely: kusala, akusala, vipāka and kiriya. Jāti literally
means ``birth'' or nature.}. The first javana-citta conditions the
second javana-citta by repetition-condition, āsevana-paccaya, thus, the
first javana-citta is the conditioning dhamma (paccaya dhamma) and the
second one is the conditioned dhamma (paccayupanna dhamma). After that
the second javana-citta which is in its turn the conditioning dhamma,
conditions the third one, and so on, until the seventh javana-citta
which does not condition the succeeding citta in this way since it is
the last javana-citta.

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna (Analytical Exposition, Repetition-condition):

@quotation


``Preceding faultless states (kusala dhammas) are related to subsequent
faultless states by repetition-condition.

Preceding faulty states (akusala dhammas) are related to subsequent
faulty states by repetition-condition.

Preceding functional indeterminate states @footnote{avyakata dhammas,
neither kusala nor akusala, which are in this case functional, kiriya.}
are related to subsequent functional indeterminate states by
repetition-condition.''


@end quotation


We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XVII, 87) about repetition-condition:


@quotation

``A dhamma that assists the efficiency and power of the proximate (next)
in the sense of repetition-condition, like repeated application to
books, and so on@enddots{}''


@end quotation


Just as one, in learning by heart, through constant repetition, becomes
more proficient in reciting texts, evenso the preceding javana-citta
supports the succeeding one by repetition-condition. 

In the sense-door process the javana-cittas follow upon the
determining-consciousness (votthapana-citta) and in the mind-door
process upon the mind-door adverting-consciousness
(mano-dvārāvajjana-citta). The citta that performs the function of
votthapana, determining, is the ahetuka kiriya@-citta classified as
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta. The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta performs two
functions: in the mind-door process it performs the function of
adverting to the object through the mind-door, and in the sense-door
process it performs the function of determining and then it is called
after its function determining-consciousness, votthapana-citta. 

The javana-cittas experience the same object as the preceding cittas in
the process, they ``run through'' the object @footnote{Javana can be
translated as ``running'', impulse.}, but, except in the case of the
arahat, they experience it in a wholesome way or in an unwholesome way.
Whether the javana-cittas are kusala cittas or akusala cittas depends
on natural decisive support-condition which includes one's accumulated
inclinations, and also on root-condition and on several other
conditions. When we experience a pleasant object through one of the
senses, there may be wise attention or unwise attention to the object.
When the determining-consciousness in a sense-door process or the
mind-door adverting-consciousness in a mind-door process is followed by
kusala javana-cittas there is wise attention, and when they are
followed by akusala javana-cittas there is unwise attention. 

We have accumulated a great deal of attachment and therefore,
lobha-mūla-cittas tend to arise on account of a pleasant object. When,
for instance, the first javana-citta is lobha-mūla-citta without wrong
view and accompanied by pleasant feeling @footnote{There are eight
types of lobha-mūla-citta, see Appendix 2.}, the succeeding
javana-citta which is conditioned by the preceding one by way of
repetition-condition, is of the same type and so it is with the
following ones. During these moments we accumulate more lobha. When the
first javana-citta is kusala citta with paññā, the following
javana-cittas are of the same type. During these moments paññā is
accumulated. 

As we have seen (in Ch 4), each citta conditions the succeeding citta by
way of proximity-condition, anantara-paccaya, and by way of
contiguity-condition, samanantara-paccaya. Moreover, a preceding citta
can condition a succeeding citta by way of decisive support of
proximity, anantārupanissaya-paccaya (see Ch 7). Javana-citta, besides
being a condition for the next one by way of repetition, is also a
condition for the next one by way of proximity, contiguity and decisive
support of proximity. Realities can be related to each other by way of
several conditions. Repetition-condition only refers to javana-cittas.
The last javana-citta in a process does not condition the next citta by
way of repetition-condition, because it is succeeded by a citta of a
different jāti @footnote{It may be succeeded by tadārammaṇa-citta,
registering-consciousness, which is vipākacitta produced by kamma and
which still experiences the same object. Or it may be followed by
bhavanga-citta, life-continuum.}. The cittas which are conditioned by
way of repetition-condition have to be of the same jāti as the
conditioning citta. Thus, if the first javana-citta is akusala, the
following ones are also akusala, and if the first javana-citta is
kusala, the following ones are also kusala. 

The following javana-cittas are repetition-condition for the succeeding
javana-citta: akusala cittas, mahā-kusala cittas (of the sense-sphere),
mahā-kiriyacittas (of the arahat), the smile-producing cittas of the
arahat (ahetuka kiriyacitta), the rūpāvacara kusala cittas and
kiriyacittas (rūpa-jhānacittas) and the arūpāvacara kusala cittas and
kiriyacittas (arūpa-jhānacittas) @footnote{For details see Appendix
3.}. 

The performing of akusala kamma or kusala kamma occurs during the
moments of javana and these can produce results later on. Moreover,
during the moments of javana unwholesome or wholesome tendencies are
being accumulated. Thus, the moments of javana condition our life in
the future. When we are not intent on kusala, the javana-cittas are
akusala. When we are daydreaming or walking around, there are bound to
be akusala cittas but we may not notice this. When we speak, we may not
lie or use harsh words, but we may not notice how often we are engaged
in idle, useless speech. When we, for example, talk about the weather
or about what we are going to do tomorrow, we may not notice the many
akusala cittas which motivate our speech. Because of natural decisive
support-condition one kind of akusala can lead to another kind, and
therefore, each kind of akusala is dangerous. So long as we are not an
arahat we still have conditions for useless speech, but the study of
the Dhamma can remind us to be aware while we speak. By right
understanding it can be known whether akusala citta or kusala citta
motivates our speech.

When we perform good deeds or evil deeds, javana-cittas arise in many
different processes of cittas and each of these javana-cittas
conditions the next one by way of repetition-condition, except the
seventh javana-citta. The teaching of repetition-condition reminds us
of the danger of akusala citta. Not only one akusala citta arises
within a process of cittas, but seven similar types of citta arise,
succeeding one another, and during these moments we accumulate the
tendency to akusala so that akusala citta will arise again in the
future. When we see the disadvantage of akusala there are conditions
for the arising of kusala citta. Not only one kusala citta arises
within a process of citta, but seven similar types of citta arise,
succeeding one another. When we apply ourselves to kusala, kusala is
being accumulated. This should encourage us to perform all kinds of
kusala because this is a condition for the arising again of kusala
citta in the future. Even when we speak a word of kindness or help
someone just for a moment, for example getting something he needs and
handing it to him, there are opportunities for kusala cittas. We should
not neglect such opportunities or find them insignificant. Each moment
of kusala is valuable because at such a moment we do not think of
ourselves, there is no lobha, dosa or moha. A wholesome deed is never
lost, even if it seems to be of no importance, because kusala is
accumulated and it can be a natural decisive support-condition for
kusala in the future.

We read in the ``Atthasālinī'' (Expositor I, Part IV, Ch VIII, 159, in the
section on the bases of meritorious action) that, when one performs
dāna, there can be kusala cittas before, during and after the wholesome
deed:

@quotation


``Now, as to these bases, when we think, ‘I will give in charity', the
citta works by one or other of those eight classes of kusala citta of
the sense-sphere; in making the gift, we give by one of them; in
reflecting, ‘I have given in charity', we reflect by one of them@enddots{}''


@end quotation


The same is said about the other ways of kusala. It is beneficial to
know that there are opportunities for kusala citta, not only at the
moments we perform a deed of generosity, but also before and
afterwards, while we consider our wholesome deed. However, it depends
on conditions at which moment kusala citta arises; it is not in
anyone's power to make kusala citta arise at will. It may happen that
after having given a gift we have regret and then there are akusala
cittas. We should not have aversion towards akusala citta which arises,
because then we accumulate more akusala. Akusala citta arises because
of conditions. Akusala can be the object of mindfulness, so that it can
be seen as non-self. At the moment of mindfulness there is kusala
citta.

Kusala javana-cittas of the sense sphere, mahā-kusala cittas, are
classified as eight types: 


@itemize @minus 

@item 
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wisdom, unprompted,

@item 
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wisdom, prompted,

@item 
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wisdom, unprompted,

@item 
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wisdom, prompted,

@item 
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wisdom, unprompted,

@item 
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wisdom, prompted,

@item 
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wisdom, unprompted,

@item 
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wisdom, prompted.

@end itemize


There are different conditioning factors for these eight types of kusala
citta; if we have more knowledge of these factors we shall understand
more clearly the great diversity of citta. Cittas are variegated
because they are conditioned by different roots which have different
intensities. The paññā which may accompany citta can be of many degrees
and intensities. It can be intellectual understanding which stems from
reading and considering, or it can be direct understanding of the
characteristics of realities. Citta can be conditioned by the four
predominant factors of chanda (desire-to-do), viriya (energy),
(firmness of) citta or vima@udotaccent{m}sa (investigation of Dhamma, paññā
cetasika) @footnote{See Ch 3.} and these can be of many degrees. Citta
experiences objects and these can condition citta in different ways: by
way of object-condition, of object-predominance-condition or of
decisive support of object @footnote{See Ch 2, Ch 3 and Ch 7.}. Kusala
citta is accompanied by different sobhana cetasikas which condition the
citta. We all have different accumulations and thus the type of kusala
citta and its intensity varies for different people. Although there is
a great diversity of kusala cittas, the Buddha, by his omniscience,
classified them as eight types. 

The ``Atthasālinī'' (in the same section as quoted above, 160, 161)
mentions the eight types of kusala citta and states that the Buddha's
knowledge is more infinite than space, the worldsystems, and the
beings in the worldsystems. We read:


@quotation

``@dots{} Now, all these classes of kusala cittas experienced in the realm of
sense, arising in the countless beings in the countless world-systems,
the Supreme Buddha, as though weighing them in a great balance, or
measuring them by putting them in a measure, has classified by means of
his omniscience, and has shown them to be eight, making them into eight
similar groups@enddots{}''

@end quotation



The javana-cittas arising in one process of citta are of the same jāti,
that is, kusala, akusala or, in the case of arahats, kiriya
(inoperative), since the arahat does not accumulate any more kamma.
However, the javana-cittas arising in one process of cittas may
sometimes be of a different plane of citta. There are four planes of
citta: the sensuous plane of consciousness, the plane of
rūpa-jhānacitta, of arūpa-jhānacitta and of lokuttara citta. Cittas of
the sensuous plane of consciousness, kāmāvacara cittas, experience
sense objects. Jhānacittas do not experience sense objects but they
experience with absorption one of the meditation subjects of samatha.
Lokuttara cittas experience nibbāna. 

When someone develops samatha and is about to attain jhāna, first, in
the process of cittas leading to the attainment of jhāna, kāmāvacara
cittas arise, which are, in the case of non-arahats, mahā-kusala cittas
experiencing the meditation subject through the mind-door @footnote{
See Appendix 3 for details.}. Each one of the mahā-kusala cittas is
repetition-condition for the next one and the last mahā-kusala citta in
that process conditions the jhāna-citta by way of repetition-condition.
The jhāna-citta is also kusala citta but of a higher plane of citta.
When someone is not yet skilled, only one moment of jhāna-citta arises,
but when he has become proficient many moments of jhānacitta can arise
(Visuddhimagga IV, 78, and IV, 125). Each one of these jhānacittas
conditions the next one by way of repetition-condition.

In the process of cittas leading to enlightenment, first mahā-kusala
cittas @footnote{See Appendix 3 for details.} arise accompanied by
paññā which clearly sees the reality appearing at that moment as
impermanent, dukkha or anattā. One of these three characteristics of
reality is at that moment penetrated by paññā since citta can
experience only one object at a time. Each of these mahā-kusala cittas
is repetition-condition for the next one. The last mahā-kusala-citta in
that process, arising before the magga-citta conditions the magga-citta
by way of repetition-condition @footnote{This mahā-kusala citta
experiences nibbāna. When it precedes the magga-citta of the sotāpanna
it is called change-of-lineage, gotrabhū, and when it precedes the
magga-citta of the three higher stages of enlightenment it is called
purification, vodāna. See Ch. 2.}. The magga-citta is of a higher
plane of citta, it is lokuttara kusala citta. The magga-citta is
immediately succeeded by its result, the phala-citta, but it does not
condition the phala-citta by way of repetition-condition since the
phala-citta is of a different jāti, the jāti which is vipāka. The
phala-citta performs the function of javana, but it is not
repetition-condition for the succeeding citta. 

When we develop vipassanā, awareness of nāma and rūpa occurs during the
moments of javana. Each javana-citta conditions the next one by
repetition-condition and in this way understanding can be accumulated.

When mindfulness does not arise, the javana-cittas are bound to be
accompanied by clinging. When we, for example, use a soft cushion, we
are likely to cling but we may not notice it. When sati arises,
softness can be understood as only a rūpa, not a cushion, or, when the
experience of softness is the object of sati, it can be realized as
only a nāma, an experience. We may think that we can possess things and
this can lead to covetousness, avarice, jealousy and many other kinds
of defilements. In reality there is no possessor, only seeing which
experiences visible object, or touching which experiences tangible
object, and other moments of citta experiencing one object at a time.
All these realities fall way, they do not stay. Gradually we may know
the difference between moments without sati, when we cling to concepts
we are thinking of, and moments with sati, when only one reality at a
time appears through one of the six doors. Not theoretical
understanding, but only direct understanding of realities can lead to
eradication of defilements. Enlightenment can be attained only if right
understanding of realities has been developed in the course of
countless lives.

The following sutta from the ``Kindred Sayings''(V, Mahā-vagga, Book II,
XLVI, Kindred Sayings on the Limbs of Wisdom, Ch IV, paragraph 8, Restraint and
hindrance) reminds us of the importance of listening to the Dhamma and
considering it as condition for the development of the factors leading
to enlightenment. We read that the Buddha said:


@quotation

``Monks, there are these five checks, hindrances and corruptions of the
heart, which weaken insight. What five?

Sensual desire, monks, is a check and hindrance, a corruption of the
heart, that weakens insight. Malevolence@dots{} sloth and torpor@dots{} excitement
and flurry@dots{} doubt and wavering@dots{} These five@dots{} weaken insight.

The seven limbs of wisdom @footnote{Bojjhangas or factors of
enlightenment.}, monks, if unrestrained, unhindered, if cultivated and
made much of with uncorrupted heart, conduce to realizing the fruits of
liberation by knowledge. What seven?

Herein a monk cultivates the limb of wisdom that is mindfulness@dots{} the
limb of wisdom that is investigation of the Dhamma@dots{} the limb of wisdom
that is energy@dots{} the limb of wisdom that is rapture (pīti), the limb of
wisdom that is tranquillity@dots{} the limb of wisdom that is concentration@dots{}
the limb of wisdom that is equanimity, that is based on seclusion, on
dispassion, on cessation, that ends in self-surrender.

Now, monks, at the time when the ariyan disciple makes the Dhamma his
object, gives attention to it, with all his mind considers it, with
ready ear listens to the Dhamma, - at such time these five hindrances
exist not in him: at such time the seven limbs of wisdom by cultivation
go to fulfilment@enddots{}''

@end quotation





















@node Kamma and Vipāka-Condition

@chapter Kamma and Vipāka-Condition




The term kamma is generally used for good and bad deeds, but kamma is
actually cetanā cetasika, volition. Cetanā arises with each citta and
it can therefore be kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. Cetanā directs
the associated dhammas and coordinates their tasks (Atthasālinī, Book
I, Part IV, Chapter I, 111). 

There are two kinds of kamma-condition: conascent kamma-condition and
asynchronous kamma-condition. If we remember that kamma is cetanā
cetasika and that cetanā arises with each citta we can understand what
conascent kamma-condition is. Cetanā which arises with each citta
directs the associated dhammas to accomplish their functions; it
conditions these dhammas by way of conascent kamma-condition, sahajāta
kamma-paccaya. 

Cetanā which accompanies kusala citta and akusala citta has a double
function: it directs the tasks of the associated dhammas and it has the
function of ``willing'' or activity in good and bad deeds. In this last
function it is capable to produce the results of good and bad deeds
later on. Kusala cetanā and akusala cetanā that produce the appropriate
results of good deeds or bad deeds later on condition these results by
way of asynchronous kamma-condition. Thus, this is kamma operating from
a different time (nāṇakkhaṇika kamma-paccaya), it is different from
conascent kamma-condition. 

As regards conascent kamma-condition, sahajāta kamma-paccaya, the
cetanās accompanying all eightynine types of citta @footnote{Cittas
which are kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. For
the classification of the different cittas see my ``Abhidhamma in Daily
Life'', Ch 23.} are conascent kamma-condition for the citta and the
other cetasikas they accompany as well as for the rūpa produced by
them. The cetanā which accompanies kusala citta and akusala citta
conditions citta, the other cetasikas and the rūpa produced by them by
way of conascent kamma-condition, sahajāta-kamma-paccaya. Vipākacitta
and kiriyacitta can also produce rūpa @footnote{Citta, being one of
the four factors which produces groups of rūpas of the body, can
produce groups of rūpas consisting of at least the eight ``inseparable
rūpas'' (the four great Elements, colour, odour, flavour and nutritive
essense) and in addition there can be other rūpas as well in such a
group.}; the accompanying cetanā conditions citta, the other
cetasikas and rūpa by way of conascent- kamma-condition, sahajāta
kamma-paccaya. Seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions are
vipākacittas which do not produce rūpa, but the accompanying cetanā
conditions citta and the other cetasikas by way of conascent
kamma-condition. When the paṭisandhi-citta arises the accompanying
cetanā conditions that citta, the other cetasikas and also the
kamma-produced rūpa which arises at the same time by way of conascent
kamma-condition (Paṭṭhāna, Faultless Triplet, Investigation Chapter,
Kamma, paragraph 427, vii b).

Asynchronous kamma-condition, nāṇakkhaṇika kamma-paccaya @footnote{
Nāṇakkhaṇika literally means: working from a different time and this
pertains to the fact that it produces result later on.}, pertains to
kusala cetanā or akusala cetanā which is able to produce later on
results of good or evil deeds committed through body, speech and mind.
The cetanā, volition or intention, which motivates a good or bad deed
falls away, but since each citta conditions the next one in the cycle
of birth and death, the force of cetanā is accumulated from moment to
moment so that it can produce result later on. It conditions the result
in the form of vipākacitta and specific rūpas of the body @footnote{
Kamma is one of the four factors which produces rūpas of the body. It
produces rūpas such as the sense-bases, the heart-base and femininity
or masculinity.} by way of asynchronous kamma-condition. When one,
for example, slanders, there is akusala kamma through speech and this
can produce akusala vipāka later on. The akusala cetanā or kamma
conditions the vipākacitta which arises later on by way of asynchronous
kamma-condition. At the same time, the akusala cetanā is related to the
citta and cetasikas it accompanies and to speech intimation
(vacīviññatti), a rūpa produced by citta, by way of conascent
kamma-condition. Akusala cetanā and kusala cetanā condition other
phenomena by way of conascent kamma-condition and also by way of
asynchronous kamma-condition. 

Kusala kamma and akusala kamma through body, speech and mind can be of
different degrees. Kamma is not always a ``completed action''. There are
certain constituent factors which make kamma a completed action. For
example, in the case of killing there have to be: a living being,
consciousness of there being a living being, intention of killing,
effort and consequent death (Atthasālinī, I, Book I, Part III, Ch V,
97). If one of these factors is lacking kamma is not a completed
action. Akusala kamma which is a completed action is capable of
producing an unhappy rebirth. Not only birth is the result of kamma,
but also the experience of pleasant or unpleasant objects through the
senses, which are seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting or experiencing
tangible objects through the bodysense throughout life are the result
of kamma. Some kammas produce their results in the same life in which
they were committed, some in the next life, some in later lives.

We read in the ``Visuddhimagga''( XIX, 14-17) about different ways of
classifying kamma. Kamma can be classified as weighty, habitual,
death-threshold and reserve or effective kamma @footnote{Kamma
kaṭattā, literally: because of kamma that has been performed. Sometimes
it is translated as ``stored up kamma'', but this is misleading, since it
may suggest something which is permanent. Kamma falls away immediately,
but its force is accumulated in the citta. Since our life is an
unbroken series of cittas arising and falling away, and each citta
conditions the next citta, kamma can produce result later on.}
(Visuddhimagga XIX, 15,16). Weighty (garuka) kamma is very unprofitable
kamma, such as the killing of a parent, or very profitable kamma, such
as jhānacitta. Habitual (āciṇṇa) kamma is what one usually and
repeatedly does. Death-threshold (āsanna) kamma is what is vividly
remembered just before death. Reserve or effective kamma (kamma
kaṭattā, because of being performed) is kamma which produces rebirth if
there is no opportunity for one of the three foregoing kammas to do so.

Do we know which type of kamma we usually and repeatedly perform? Is it
akusala kamma through body, speech or mind, or is it kusala kamma? When
we perform kusala kamma such as generosity do we know whether the
kusala citta is accompanied by paññā or unaccompanied by paññā
@footnote{See Appendix 2 for the different types of kusala citta.} ?
The development of satipaṭṭhāna, right understanding of nāma and rūpa,
is kusala kamma. When we see the benefit of considering nāma and rūpa
over and over again, in one's daily life, it can become habitual kamma,
often performed. Then paññā can be developed which leads to the end of
rebirth-producing kamma.

Kamma can also be classified as: reproductive, consolidating,
obstructive and destructive. Reproductive kamma (janaka kamma) produces
nāma and rūpa at birth and in the course of life. Consolidating or
supportive kamma (upatthambaka kamma) consolidates the result which has
been produced by reproductive kamma. Supportive kusala kamma can
prolong the arising of pleasant results in the form of health or wealth
and supportive akusala kamma can prolong the arising of painful feeling
and the experience of other unpleasant objects in the course of life.
Obstructive or counteractive kamma (upapī@udotaccent{l}aka kamma) weakens,
interrupts or retards the result of kusala kamma or akusala kamma.
Someone who has a happy rebirth may suffer ill health so that he cannot
enjoy pleasant objects. An animal who has an unhappy rebirth may still
have a comfortable life because of obstructive kamma. Destructive kamma
(upaghātaka kamma) counteracts other weaker kamma to produce its
result; instead it produces its own result.

A deed can produce result when the time is right @footnote{We read in
the Commentary to the ``Book of Analysis'', the ``Dispeller of Delusion''
(Ch 16, Tathāgata Powers 2, 439-443) about four factors which condition
kamma to produce result: destiny, or the place where one is born
(gati); substratum, including beauty or ugliness in body (upadhi); the
time when one is born (kāla) and the ``means'' (payoga), including skill
in one's occupation, in the performing of one's tasks. These four
factors can be favorable (sampatti) or unfavorable (vipatti). If they
are favorable, akusala kamma has less opportunity and kusala kamma has
more opportunity to produce result and if they are unfavorable, akusala
kamma has more opportunity and kusala kamma has less opportunity to
produce result. For example, if someone is born in a happy plane, if he
has beauty of body, if he is born in a favorable time (kāla), when
there is a good king and the country is prosperous, if he is successful
in his occupation, in the performing of his tasks (payoga), the
ripening of akusala kamma is inhibited and there is opportunity for
kusala kamma to give results. If these four factors are unfavorable
(vipatti), the opposite is the case: akusala kamma has the opportunity
to ripen and the results of kusala kamma are inhibited.}. Some deeds
produce result in this life, some in the next life and some after
aeons. The lokuttara kusala citta, the magga-citta, produces immediate
result in the form of the phalacitta, fruition-consciousness (lokuttara
vipākacitta), without any interval. The magga-citta is anantara
kamma-paccaya for the phala-citta (anantara means: without interval). 

We have accumulated many different kammas and we do not know which of
these will produce result at a particular moment; as we have seen (in
Ch 8), kamma that produces result is also natural decisive
support-condition, pakatūpanissaya paccaya, for that result. Thus,
kamma performed in the past is kamma-condition and natural decisive
support-condition, that is, a cogent reason for the result it produces.
 

Only a Buddha has full knowledge of the true nature of kamma and vipāka
and this knowledge is not shared by his disciples (``Visuddhimagga'' XIX,
17).

We do not know which of our deeds will produce rebirth. We read in the
``Greater Analysis of Deeds'' (Middle Length Sayings III, 136) that the
Buddha, while staying near Rajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, spoke to
ānanda about deeds and their results. We read about someone who
performs evil deeds and is of wrong view, and who has an unhappy
rebirth. However, for such a person there is also a possibility of a
happy rebirth. We read:

@quotation

``@dots{} As to this, ānanda, whatever individual there is who makes onslaught
on creatures, takes what has not been given@dots{} is of false view and who,
at the breaking up of the body after dying arises in a good bourn, a
heaven world either a lovely deed to be experienced as happiness
was done by him earlier, or a lovely deed to be experienced as
happiness was done by him later, or at the time of dying a right view
was adopted and firmly held by him; because of this, at the breaking up
of the body after dying he arises in a good bourn, a heaven world. If
he made onslaught on creatures here, took what had not been given@dots{} and
was of false view, he undergoes its fruition which arises here and now
or in another mode.''

@end quotation



We then read about someone who is restrained from evil and is of right
view, and who has a happy rebirth. However, even for such a person
there may be an unhappy rebirth. We read:

@quotation


``@dots{} As to this, ānanda, whatever individual there is who is restrained
from making onslaught on creatures, is restrained from taking what has
not been given@dots{} is of right view and who, at the breaking up of the
body after dying, arises in the sorrowful ways, a bad bourn, the
Downfall, Niraya Hell either an evil deed to be experienced as
anguish was done by him earlier, or an evil deed to be experienced as
anguish was done by him later, or at the time of dying a false view was
adopted and firmly held by him; because if this@dots{} he arises in the
sorrowful ways@dots{} Niraya Hell. And he who was restrained from making
onslaught on creatures@dots{} and was of right view undergoes its fruition
which arises either here and now or in another mode@enddots{}''

@end quotation



So long as we perform kamma there are conditions for rebirth and there
will be dukkha. Kamma is one of the links in the ``Dependent
Origination'' (Paticca Samuppāda), the chain of conditionally arisen
phenomena which cause the continuation of the cycle of birth and death.
When all defilements have been eradicated there will be no more
rebirth. We read in the ``Gradual Sayings'' (Book of the Tens, Ch XVII,
Jāṇussoṇi, paragraph 8, Due to lust, malice and delusion): 


@quotation

``Monks, the taking of life is threefold, I declare. It is due to lust,
malice and delusion. Taking what is not given@dots{} wrong conduct in sexual
desires@dots{} falsehood@dots{} spiteful speech@dots{} bitter speech@dots{} idle babble@dots{}
coveting@dots{} harmfulness@dots{} wrong view, is threefold, I declare. It is due
to lust, malice and delusion.

Thus, monks, lust is the coming-to-be of a chain of causal action; so is
malice. Delusion, monks, is the coming-to-be of a chain of causal
action. By destroying lust, by destroying malice, by destroying
delusion comes the breaking up of the chain of causal action.''


@end quotation


The arahat can still have vipāka which is conditioned by asynchronous
kamma-condition, but from the time he attained arahatship he cannot
perform new kamma. The mahā-kiriyacittas (inoperative cittas of the
sense sphere which are sobhana, beautiful) of the arahat do not produce
vipāka.




As to vipāka-condition, this concerns phenomena which are conascent,
arising at the same time. Citta and its accompanying cetasikas which
are vipāka, condition one another in this way. We read in the
``Visuddhimagga'' (XVII,89) that they assist one another ``by effortless
quiet''. They are merely vipāka, they have no other activity. The nature
of vipākacitta is altogether different from the nature of kusala citta
and akusala citta which are active in a wholesome way or in an
unwholesome way. Vipākacitta and its accompanying cetasikas also
condition one another by way of conascence-condition and by way of
mutuality-condition. 

In the planes of existence where the five khandhas (nāma and rūpa)
arise, citta produces rūpa which arises at the same time. The
vipākacittas, except the five sense-cognitions, which produce rūpa,
condition this rūpa by way of vipāka-condition @footnote{
Bhavanga-citta, receiving-consciousness (sampaṭicchana-citta) or
investigation-consciousness (santīraṇa-citta) are for example
vipākacittas which produce rūpas. See Appendix 1 for these cittas.}
according to the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, Investigation Chapter,
paragraph 428). 

In the planes where the five khandhas arise, kamma produces at the first
moment of life the rebirth-consciousness (paṭisandhi-citta) which is
vipākacitta, as well as rūpa. The rebirth-consciousness conditions the
rūpa that is also produced by kamma at the same time by way of
vipāka-condition, according to the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (same section). They are
both results of kamma. The paṭisandhi-citta is the first vipākacitta
arising in life. When it is the result of kusala kamma birth occurs in
a happy plane and when it is the result of akusala kamma birth occurs
in an unhappy plane. Kusala kamma and akusala kamma can be of many
different degrees and thus the vipāka they produce can also be of
different degrees. When the paṭisandhi-citta is the result of weak
kusala kamma, it is ahetuka kusala vipākacitta (unaccompanied by
sobhana hetus) and in the case of birth as a human, one is handicapped
from the first moment of life. The paṭisandhi-citta can also be
mahā-vipāka, accompanied by two or three sobhana hetus @footnote{By
alobha, non-attachment or generosity and by adosa, non-aversion or
kindness, or by paññā as well.}. The mahā-vipākacitta is also
conditioned by way of hetu-paccaya, root-condition. When the paṭi-
sandhi-citta is the result of akusala kamma it is ahetuka akusala
vipākacitta, and in that case one has an unhappy rebirth in one of the
woeful planes.

Human birth is the result of kusala kamma. Paṭisandhi-cittas are
variegated; for instance, in the case of a human being, there can be
nine different types of paṭisandhi-citta as I explained in my
``Abhidhamma in Daily Life'' @footnote{One type is ahetuka kusala
vipāka, and eight types are mahā-vipākacittas. See my Abhidhamma in
Daily Life Ch 11.} and these can vary greatly as to their nature and
intensity. We see a great difference in bodily features: some people
are beautiful, some are not beautiful. There are differences in the
sense-faculties such as eyesense and earsense. There are differences in
bodily strength, some people are apt to have many illnesses and they
are weak, some have only few illnesses and they are strong. People are
born with different degrees of paññā or without it; they have different
capabilities to develop paññā. If the paṭisandi-cittas of people were
not so different, there would not be such a variety in the
characteristics of different people. 

The vipākacitta which is paṭisandhi-citta is succeeded by the
vipākacitta which is bhavanga-citta because of proximate-condition,
contiguity-condition and proximate decisive support-condition. The
bhavanga-citta is the same type of citta as the paṭisandhi-citta. There
are countless bhavanga-cittas arising throughout life in between the
processes of cittas and all of them are of the same type as the
paṭisandhi-citta. They maintain the continuity in the life of a person
who is born with particular inclinations and capacities. 

Throughout life kamma produces vipākacittas arising in processes of
cittas which experience pleasant or unpleasant objects. Seeing, for
example, is vipākacitta which experiences a pleasant or unpleasant
visible object through the eyesense. It merely sees, it does not know
whether the object is pleasant or unpleasant. Citta and the
accompanying cetasikas condition one another by way of
vipāka-condition, they assist one another in ``effortless quiet''. The
succeeding receiving-consciousness, sampaṭicchana-citta @footnote{See
Appendix I for the cittas arising in a process.} , is also vipākacitta,
and this is succeeded by another vipākacitta, the
investigating-consciousness, santīraṇa-citta. This is succeeded by the
determining-consciousness, the votthapana-citta, which is a
kiriyacitta. After that the javana-cittas arise which are, in the case
of non-arahats, kusala cittas or akusala cittas. When the object is
pleasant, lobha-mūla-cittas are likely to arise and when the object is
unpleasant, dosa-mūla-cittas are likely to arise. Cittas arise and fall
away succeeding one another very rapidly and so long as paññā has not
been developed, we do not realize when there is vipākacitta and when
there is kusala citta or akusala citta. When we have an unpleasant
experience such as an accident we keep on thinking of the concept of a
situation or of an event we consider as ``our vipāka'' and we may wonder
why this had to happen to us. We tend to forget that vipākacitta is
only one moment which falls away immediately. Instead of thinking of
concepts with aversion we should develop understanding of paramattha
dhammas, realities which each have their own characteristic and which
appear one at a time. 

When we see visible object and we like the object it seems that seeing
and liking occur at the same time. We do not realize that there is
proximity-condition, anantara-paccaya, because of which each citta is
succeeded by the next one, without any interval. Or we do not even
realize that there is attachment to the object. We may think that there
is seeing while there is in reality already clinging. Without knowing
it we continue to accumulate more akusala.

It is important to have right understanding of cause and effect in our
life. We like to experience pleasant objects and we may think that we
can choose ourselves which objects we wish to experience. We buy
beautiful things in order to look at them, we prepare delicious food in
order to enjoy pleasant flavours. However, something can happen so that
our expectations do not come true. It depends on kamma whether we
experience a pleasant object or an unpleasant object at a particular
moment. Kamma produces its appropriate result and when it is time for
akusala vipāka it is unavoidable. We never know what will happen at the
next moment, but when there is more understanding of cause and effect
in our life we can be prepared to face whatever may happen. When right
understanding arises of kamma and vipāka, the citta is at that moment
kusala citta and there is no opportunity for aversion towards
unpleasant experiences. In being mindful of the characteristics of
seeing, hearing, thinking and the other realities appearing in daily
life, ignorance can gradually decrease. We can learn to distinguish 
between the moments of vipāka and the moments of kusala citta and
akusala citta.




























@node Nutriment-Condition

@chapter Nutriment-Condition 




There are four kinds of nutriment which are nutriment-condition,
āhāra-paccaya. One kind is physical nutriment and three are mental
nutriment. The four kinds of nutriment are:

@itemize @minus
@item 
physical nutriment

@item 
contact (phassa cetasika)

@item 
volition (manosañcetanā which is cetanā cetasika)

@item 
consciousness (viññāṇa)

@end itemize


In the case of nutriment-condition, āhāra-paccaya, a conditioning dhamma
maintains and supports the growth and development of the conditioned
dhammas @footnote{The Commmentary to the ``Discourse on Right
Understanding'' (Middle Length Sayings I, 9), the Papañcasūdanī, gives
an explanation of the word āhāra. The condition fetches (āharati) its
own fruit, therefore it is called āhāra.}. 

As regards physical nutriment, this sustains the rūpas of the body.
Nutritive essence (ojā) present in food that has been taken permeates
the body and then new rūpas can be produced. As we have seen, nutrition
is one of the four factors which produces rūpas of the body, the other
three being kamma, citta and temperature. Nutritive essence is present
in all groups of rūpas; it is one of the eight ``inseparable rūpas''
present in all materiality, no matter it is the body or materiality
outside. Nutritive essence arises together with the four Great Elements
of solidity, cohesion, temperature and motion, and also with visible
object, flavour and odour. Nutritive essence present in the groups of
rūpas of the body cannot produce new rūpas without the support of
external nutritive essence in food. For the new being in the mother's
womb it is necessary that the mother takes food so that nutritive
essence present in food can permeate its body. Then nutritive essence
can produce new rūpas and thus it goes on throughout life. The
nutritive essence which, because of the support of external nutritive
essence, produces new rūpas of the body also supports and maintains the
groups of rūpas produced by kamma, citta and temperature. 

When nutriment has been taken, the nutritive essence present in the body
can produce new groups of rūpas, consisting of the eight inseparable
rūpas. Nutritive essence present in such an octad can in its turn
produce another group of eight ``inseparable rūpas'' (an octad). In this
way several octads produced by nutrition will arise one after the
other, and thus, nutriment which has been taken can be sufficient for
some time afterwards (Visuddhimagga XX, 37).

Nutritive essence is present in food, but one cannot eat nutritive
essence alone. We need also sufficient substance or solidity, so that
we do not go hungry. Edible food made into morsels @footnote{The Pāli
word kabaliṇkāro āhāro means ``morsel food'', food that can be swallowed.} can be swallowed; it has the function of nourishing. 

We cannot live without food, but it is dangerous to cling to it. In
order to obtain it, people may commit akusala kamma which is capable of
producing akusala vipāka. Someone who is greedy may be reborn as a
``peta'' (ghost). So long as we cling to food there will be rebirth and
this is dukkha. We may recollect the disadvantages of searching for
food, the foulness of nutriment and its digestion, with the purpose of
having less clinging to food.

We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (I, 89) that the monk should remember
that food is not for intoxication, smartening, embellishment or
amusement. It should be taken for the sake of the endurance and
continuance of the body, for the ending of discomfort and for the
assisting of the life of purity (Visuddhimagga I, 91,92). Just as a
sick man uses medicine he should use almsfood, so that he will not be
feeling hungry anymore, and he should avoid immoderate eating. Thus he
will be healthy and blameless and live in comfort (Visuddhimagga I,
94).

We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (Ch XI, 11, and following), in the
section on the ``Perception of Repulsiveness in Nutriment'', about the
disadvantages of having to search for food. The monk has to go in dirty
places while he walks with his almsbowl. He does not always receive
food or he receives unappetizing food. Also when he takes the food, the
process of chewing, swallowing and digesting is disgusting, not to
speak of the secretion while it is being digested and of its flowing
out again. In the Commentary to the ``Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta'' ( I, 10), the
``Papañcasūdanī'' @footnote{Translated by Ven. Soma in ``The Way of
Mindfulness'', B.P.S. Kandy, Sri Lanka.}, we read in the section on
Mindfulness of the Body, Clear Comprehension in the Partaking of Food
and Drink, that in the process of eating and digesting the food, only
elements are performing their functions. There is no self, no person
who eats. We read:


@quotation

``It is oscillation (vāyodhātu, the element of wind or motion) that does
the taking onward, the moving away from side to side; and it is
oscillation that bears, turns around, pulverizes, causes the removal of
liquidity, and expels.

Extension (paṭhavīdhātu, the element of earth or solidity) also does
bearing up, turning around, pulverizing and the removal of liquidity.

Cohesion ( āpodhātu, the element of water) moistens and preserves
wetness.

Caloricity ( tejodhātu, the element of heat) ripens or digests the food
that goes in.

Space (ākāsadhātu) becomes the way for the entering of the food@enddots{}''

@end quotation



We read in the ``Kindred Sayings'' (II, Kindred Sayings on Cause, Ch VII,
the Great Chapter, paragraph 63, Child's Flesh) about parents who were with
their child in the jungle. Since there was no food and all three of
them would have to die of hunger, they slew their child and ate its
flesh, not for pleasure, from indulgence, for physical beauty,
attractiveness. They took it in order not to die and to be able to
cross the jungle. We then read that the Buddha said to the monks:


@quotation

``Even so, monks, I declare should solid food be regarded. When such food
is well understood, the passions of the five senses are well
understood. When the passions of the five senses are well understood,
the fetters do not exist bound by which the ariyan disciple could come
again to this world.''

@end quotation



The Commentary to this sutta states that the Buddha spoke this discourse
because the Order received abundant almsfood and requisites, and the
Buddha wanted to exhort the monks to make use of the requisites only
after wise reflection. 

Physical nutriment conditions the rūpas of the body by way of
āhāra-paccaya, nutriment-condition. As we have seen, there are three
kinds of mental nutriment which are: contact (phassa), (mental)
volition (manosañcetanā) and citta (viññāṇa). Just as physical food
supports and maintains the body, so does mental nutriment support and
maintain the accompanying dhammas. In the case of mental nutriment, the
conditioning dhamma is conascent with the conditioned dhammas. The
mental nutriments condition the dhammas which arise together with them
and the rūpas produced by citta and cetasikas by way of
nutriment-condition. At the moment of rebirth the mental nutriments
condition the associated dhammas and the rūpa produced by kamma by way
of nutriment-condition (Paṭṭhāna, Faultless Triplet, Ch VII,
Investigation Chapter, Nutriment, paragraph 429). 

As to the mental nutriment which is contact, phassa, this is a cetasika
which contacts the object so that citta and the accompanying cetasikas
can experience it @footnote{Phassa is nāma, it is not physical
contact.}. Without contact citta and cetasikas could not experience
any object, thus, contact supports them, it is a mental nutriment for
them. It accompanies each citta and it conditions citta and the
accompanying cetasikas by way of āhāra-paccaya, nutriment-condition. It
also conditions rūpa produced by citta and cetasikas by way of
nutriment-condition. When bodily painful feeling arises, we know that
there is contact, otherwise there could not be the experience of an
unpleasant object. This experience does not last. When hearing arises
we know that there is another kind of contact; it contacts sound so
that hearing can experience it. Through mindfulness of realities as
they appear one at a time, one can come to understand that there are
different contacts all the time and that the experience of the
different objects does not last. 

As to the mental nutriment which is volition, manosañcetanā @footnote{Mano is mind and cetanā is volition. In the context of āhāra-paccaya the word manosañcetanā, mental volition, is used to denote cetanā cetasika.}, this is cetanā cetasika which accompanies all eightynine
types of citta, thus it can be of the jāti which is kusala, akusala,
vipāka or kiriya. It coordinates the tasks of the citta and cetasikas
it accompanies, and it maintains and supports them; thus, it conditions
them by way of nutriment-condition. It also conditions the rūpa
produced by citta by way of nutriment-condition. As we have seen,
cetanā conditions the associated dhammas also by way of conascent
kamma-condition, sahajāta kamma-paccaya (see Ch 11). 

As to the mental nutriment which is viññāṇa or citta, this refers to
each citta. Citta is the chief in cognizing an object, it is the
``leader''. Without citta, cetasikas could not arise and experience an
object. Thus, citta supports and maintains the accompanying cetasikas,
it conditions them by way of nutriment-condition. When citta produces
rūpa it also conditions that rūpa by way of nutriment-condition.

Thus, at each moment the three mental nutriments of contact, volition
and citta support and maintain the dhammas arising together with them,
and the rūpa produced by them, by way of nutriment-condition. 

The mental nutriments can be considered according to the method of the
Paṭṭhāna and also according to the method of the ``Dependent
Origination'' (Paticca samuppāda), the chain of conditionally arisen
phenomena which cause the continuation of the cycle of birth and death
@footnote{Twelve factors are links in the chain of the Dependent
Origination, and each one conditions the following one. They are:
ignorance, kamma-formations (saṅkhāra, rebirth producing volitions),
consciousness (viññāṇa), nāma and rūpa, the six bases, contact,
feeling, craving, clinging, becoming, birth, old age and death. See
``Visuddhimagga'' XVII, 101-314.}. According to the method of the
Dependent Origination, contact, cetanā and viññāṇa are considered as
nutriments which condition the continuation of life in the cycle of
birth and death. 

Contact is a link in the Dependent Origination and as such it is the
condition for feeling, the following link. Contact contacts an object
and feeling experiences the ``flavour'' of that object. Contact
conditions the feeling which arises together with it. Because of
contact there is feeling, because of feeling there is craving; because
of craving there is clinging and this leads to becoming, and thus there
is rebirth. We want to live and we have attachment to sense objects; we
are never satisfied, and therefore, there are conditions for life to go
on. It is not by mere chance that we experience objects through the six
doors; all these experiences can arise because of the concurrence of
the appropriate conditions. 

We should see the disadvantages of contact. In the above quoted sutta of
the ``Kindred Sayings'', after the explanation of the disadvantages of
material food by the simile of ``Child's Flesh'', the disadvantages and
dangers of the three kinds of mental nutriment are explained. In order
to illustrate the danger of contact, the Buddha used the simile of a
cow which stands with a sore hide leaning against the wall. The
creatures who live there bite her. The same happens when she leans
against a tree and no matter where she stands she will be bitten. We
read:


@quotation

``Even so do I declare that the food which is contact should be regarded.
When such food is well understood, the three feelings @footnote{
Pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling and indifferent feeling.} are
well understood. When the three feelings are well understood, I declare
that there is nothing further which the ariyan disciple has to do.''

@end quotation



Feeling is rooted in contact and associated with it. We cling to all
sense objects and to pleasant feeling arising on account of them, but
we should remember the danger of contact which leads to dukkha. The
Commentary explains that the bhikkhu who sees the danger of being eaten
by the defilement-creatures rooted in the nutriment-contact, becomes
detached from contact @footnote{For the explanations of the three
mental nutriments by the Commentary, I used the Notes of Venerable
Bodhi in his translation of the Saṁyutta Nikāya.}. 

The mental nutriment which is volition, cetanā, is also a link in the
Dependent Origination. Under this aspect it is cetanā (saṅkhāra or
kamma-formations) which is kusala kamma, akusala kamma or
``imperturbable'' kamma (āneñja, arūpāvacara kusala kamma), and these
kammas produce rebirth. In the above quoted sutta we read about a
simile of a glowing charcoal-pit to which someone is dragged by two
strong men. He wishes to be far from it because if he falls on that
heap of charcoal he will have mortal pain and he will die. The
Commentary explains that the accumulation of kusala kamma and akusala
kamma are like these two strong men, and that his accumulated kamma
drags him along to rebirth. The round of birth and death is like the
glowing charcoal-pit according to the Commentary. We should see the
danger of cetanā which produces rebirth. We read:


@quotation

``Even so, monks, I declare that the food which is manosañcetanā (mental
volition) should be regarded. When that food is well understood, the
three cravings @footnote{Craving for sense pleasures, craving for
becoming and craving for non-becoming. Craving is the root of
mano-sañcetanā according to the Commentary.} are well understood. When
these are well understood, I declare that there is nothing further that
the ariyan disciple has to do.''

@end quotation



When viññāṇa (consciousness), the third mental nutriment, is considered
under the aspect of the Dependent Origination, it is vipākacitta which
arises at rebirth and also in the course of life. As a link of the
Dependent Origination it is conditioned by saṅkhāra, kamma-formations.
Kamma produces the vipākacitta which is the paṭisandhi-citta as well as
the vipākacittas arising throughout our life. We read in the above
quoted sutta about the simile of a robber who is punished by the King.
The King lets him be smitten with hundred spears in the morning,
hundred at noon and hundred in the evening. Acording to the Commentary,
the King represents kamma, the robber represents the worldling, the
threehundred spears represent rebirth-consciousness. The pain from
being struck by the spears is like the resultant suffering in the
course of life when rebirth has occurred. The nutriment which is
consciousness should be regarded as sorrowful as the pain suffered by
that robber. We read:


@quotation

``Even so, monks, do I declare that the food called consciousness should
be regarded. When consciousness, monks, is well understood, nāma and 
rūpa @footnote{In the Dependent Origination consciousness is a link
which conditions nāma and rūpa.} are well understood. When nāma and
rūpa are well understood, I declare that there is nothing further that
the ariyan disciple has to do.''

@end quotation



When we consider the three kinds of mental nutriment under the aspect of
the Dependent Origination, they remind us of the danger of being in the
cycle of birth and death. At each moment citta experiences an object,
but so long as we cling to the experiencing of objects we cannot see
the disadvantages of nutriment. We may not understand, for example, the
danger of seeing. Seeing merely experiences visible object and it does
not know whether the object is pleasant or unpleasant; at that moment
there is no like or dislike. After the seeing, however, there are
javana-cittas, and when we are not intent on what is wholesome the
javana-cittas are akusala cittas. Most of the time they are akusala
cittas. As soon as we have seen food lobha-mūla-cittas tend to arise.
The attachment may not be accompanied by pleasant feeling but by
indifferent feeling and then we may not know that there is attachment.
Akusala cittas arise when we perform unwholesome deeds through the body
or through speech, and they may also arise when we do not perform such
deeds. Countless moments of thinking which are akusala arise in a day,
but we usually do not realize that. On account of the objects which are
experienced through the senses, defilements arise and they are
accumulated from life to life. When we understand the danger of
defilements we can be reminded to be aware of the realities which
appear. If there is no awareness of akusala, it can never be
eradicated.





















































































@node Faculty-Condition

@chapter Faculty-Condition 




The Pāli term for faculty is ``indriya'', meaning strength, governing or
controlling principle. Indriyas are ``leaders'' for the associated
dhammas; they are leaders each in their own field. In the case of
indriya-paccaya, faculty-condition, the conditioning dhamma (paccaya
dhamma) has leadership, great control, over the conditioned dhammas
(paccayupanna dhammas). Some indriyas are rūpa and some are nāma. We
read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XVI, 1) that there are twentytwo indriyas.
They are:

@itemize @minus
@item 
The five senses: the faculties of eye, ear, nose, tongue and body-sense 

@item 
mind faculty

@item 
femininity faculty

@item 
masculinity faculty

@item 
life faculty (one is rūpa and one is nāma)

@item 
bodily pleasure faculty

@item 
pain faculty

@item 
pleasant feeling faculty

@item 
unpleasant feeling faculty

@item 
equanimity (indifferent feeling) faculty

@item 
faith faculty

@item 
energy faculty

@item 
mindfulness faculty

@item 
concentration faculty

@item 
understanding faculty

@item 
``I-shall-come-to-know-the-unknown'' faculty @*(anaññātaññassāmī't'indriya)

@item 
higher knowledge faculty (aññindriya)

@item 
faculty of him who knows (aññātāvindriya)

@end itemize


Of these twentytwo faculties, twenty are faculty-condition and two,
namely the femininity faculty and the masculinity faculty, are not
faculty-condition as we shall see. 

The rūpas which are the five sense-bases control the functions of the
sense-cognitions (seeing, hearing, etc.), they condition these
vipākacittas by way of faculty-condition. They arise previously to the
sense-cognitions because rūpa at its arising moment is too weak to be a
base for citta. Since rūpa lasts longer than citta, the sense-bases are
still present when the sense-cognitions arise and they condition them
by way of faculty-condition. They are base-prenascent faculties.
Without the eye faculty there cannot be seeing, it conditions
seeing-consciousness and its accompanying cetasikas by way of 
faculty-condition. The rūpa (pasāda-rūpa) which is eyesense is the eye
faculty; it is leader in its own field, in seeing. It cannot be leader
in the field of hearing. 

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation
Chapter, paragraph 430) that the faculties which are the five senses are
related to the sense-cognitions by way of faculty-condition: 


@quotation

``Eye-faculty is related to eye-consciousness by faculty-condition;
ear-faculty to ear-consciousness@dots{} nose-faculty to nose-consciousness@dots{}
tongue-faculty to tongue-consciousness@dots{} body-faculty is related to
body-consciousness by faculty-condition.''

@end quotation



The rūpas which are the five sense-bases condition the five pairs of
sense-cognitions, the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas, also by dependence-condition,
nissaya-paccaya (see Ch 6), and by prenascence-condition,
pure-jāta-paccaya (see Ch 9), since they have to arise previously to
the citta for which they are the base. The faculties which are the
senses are kamma-produced rūpas. The quality of these faculties is
different for different people: some have keen eyesense, others have
weak eyesense, and the same for the other senses. 

One may wonder why the rūpas which are the five senses are faculties and
why, for example, the four Great Elements on which the other rūpas
depend are not faculties. If there were no senses the four Great
Elements could not even appear. Objects can only be experienced because
there are faculties which condition the experience of objects by way of
faculty-condition. When satipaṭṭhāna is not being developed, we cannot
really understand the functions of the faculties which are the five
senses, we shall have only theoretical understanding of the faculties.
Without awareness of realities as they appear one at a time, we do not
know when there is seeing and when hearing. Different experiences seem
to occur at the same time. In being aware of visible object, the
reality which appears through the eyesense, we can begin to understand
that visible object could not appear without eyesense; and thus the
function of the eye faculty, the ``leader'' in the field of seeing, will
be clearer. 

Eyesense is different from earsense or bodysense. The senses do not
belong to a self who can coordinate the different functions of seeing,
hearing and the other experiences. We are inclined to confuse the
different realities which appear at different moments and we cling to a
``whole'' of impressions.

The ``Book of Analysis'' (Ch 5, Analysis of the Controlling Faculties, paragraph
220) reminds us that the faculties are non-self. We read:


@quotation

``Therein what is controlling faculty of eye? That eye which, derived
from the four great essentials (the four great Elements @footnote{The
eyesense arises in a group of rūpas which includes the four great
Elements of solidity, cohesion, temperature and motion which are
present in each group of rūpas. All rūpas other than the four great
Elements are ``derived rūpas'', upādā-rūpas and these are dependent on
the four great Elements.There cannot be eyesense without solidity,
cohesion, temperature and motion.}), is sensitive surface@dots{} this is an
empty village. This is called controlling faculty of eye.''


@end quotation


The same is said of the other senses, they all are empty villages. The
``Atthasalinī'' (II, Book II, Ch III, 309) explains ``empty village'':

@quotation


`` ‘And this is an empty village', refers to its being common to many and
to the absence of a possessor.''

@end quotation



Just as an empty village is unoccupied, so the eye and the other senses
have no possessor, they are anattā, non-self.

The five faculties which are the five senses (pasāda rūpas) are
sense-doors as well as physical bases (vatthus). The heart-base
(hadaya-vatthu) is the rūpa which is the physical base for the cittas
other than the sense-cognitions. One may wonder why the heart-base is
not a faculty, indriya. Objects do not impinge on the heart-base, the
heart-base is not a doorway through which objects are experienced; it
is not a ``leader'', a controlling principle in the experiencing of
objects. The heart-base is different from the mind-door. The mind-door
through which objects are experienced is a citta, the last
bhavanga-citta arising before the mind-door adverting-consciousness
which is the first citta of the mind-door process @footnote{See
Appendix 1.}. 

As regards mind faculty, manindriya, all eightynine types of citta are
mind faculty. This faculty, unlike the five sense faculties, arises
together with the realities it conditions by way of faculty-condition,
indriya-paccaya. Citta is the ``leader'' in cognizing an object, in this
field it rules over the associated dhammas. The accompanying cetasikas
share the same object, but they do not cognize it in the same way as
citta which is the leader. If there would be no citta, cetasikas could
not arise; citta is the basis and foundation for the cetasikas. Citta
conditions the accompanying cetasikas and also the rūpa it produces by
way of conascent faculty-condition. When we gesticulate or speak there
are rūpas conditioned by citta by way of faculty-condition; citta has
controlling power over these rūpas. However, mind faculty does not
last, it falls away immediately. We should not, while we speak or
gesticulate, take the citta which produces rūpas for self. Neither
should we take those rūpas for self; they arise because of conditions
and fall away again. They do not belong to anyone. 

The rebirth-consciousness, paṭisandhi-citta, conditions the accompanying
cetasikas and the rūpa produced by kamma by way of conascent
faculty-condition. Since it is the first citta in life it is too weak
to produce rūpa, but kamma which produces this citta also produces
rūpas at the same time. 

The rūpas which are femininity faculty and masculinity faculty
(itthindriya and purisindriya) have been classified as faculties, since
they condition the characteristic marks, appearance and disposition of
the sexes. However, they are not faculty-condition; they do not
condition other phenomena by way of faculty-condition.

As to life faculty, jīvitindriya, there are two kinds: nāma-jīvitindriya
and rūpa-jīvitindriya. Nāma-jīvitindriya which is a cetasika, one of
the seven ``universals'' @footnote{The seven universals are the
following cetasikas: contact (phassa), feeling (vedanā), remembrance or
perception (saññā) volition (cetanā), concentration (ekaggatā
cetasika), vitality (jīvita or jīvitindriya) and attention
(manasikāra).} arising with every citta, controls and maintains the
life of the associated dhammas. It conditions the associated dhammas
and the rūpa produced by them by way of faculty-condition. 

As to rūpa-jīvitindriya, this is classified separately in the
``Paṭṭhāna''. This rūpa is always present in the groups of rūpa produced
by kamma, such as the groups that include the senses. In the groups of
rūpa produced by citta, temperature and nutrition there is no
jīvitindriya. Past kamma which produces rūpas, has fallen away, it is
no longer present, and therefore, rūpa jīvitindriya, life-faculty, has
a specific task: it maintains the life of the kamma-produced rūpas it
has arisen together with in one group. It supports and maintains their
life, it does not produce them. It maintains the other rūpas not at the
moment of their arising, but during the moments of their presence,
before they all fall away @footnote{As we have seen, rūpa lasts as
long as seventeen moments of citta: it has an arising moment, moments
of presence and a moment of falling away.}. Life-faculty is related to
the conascent rūpas by way of faculty-condition. 

The five kinds of feelings which are pleasant bodily feeling (sukha),
painful bodily feeling (dukkha), pleasant (mental) feeling (somanassa),
unpleasant (mental) feeling (domanassa) and indifferent feeling
(upekkhā) are faculties. Throughout our life feelings arise, feeling
accompanies each citta. We can experience that bodily pain is a
faculty, a ``leader'' or controlling principle in its own field. It
controls the experiencing of the ``flavour'' of an unpleasant object and
it can make us suffer intensely. Even though we are in pleasant
surroundings we cannot rejoice when we suffer pain. At such a moment we
cannot experience anything else but pain. Painful bodily feeling,
pleasant bodily feeling, pleasant mental feeling, unpleasant (mental)
feeling or indifferent feeling ``govern'' or rule over the citta and the
other cetasikas they accompany; they condition them by way of conascent
faculty-condition. 

According to the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XIV, 128) pain makes the associated
dhammas ``wither'' and pleasant bodily feeling ``intensifies'' the
associated dhammas. Intensifying means strengthening, according to the
Commentary. As to indifferent feeling, this does not make the
accompanying dhammas wither nor does it intensify them. It is impartial
in the experience of the object, according to the Commentary. Thus, it
is more subtle in comparison with the other feelings.

We read in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XVI, 10) about the functions of the
faculties which are the five feelings:

@quotation

``@dots{} That of the faculties of pleasure, pain, joy and grief, is to govern
conascent states and impart their own particular mode of grossness to
those states. That of the equanimity faculty is to impart to them the
mode of quiet, superiority and neutrality.''
@end quotation

The two bodily feelings, pleasant bodily feeling and painful bodily
feeling accompany body-consciousness which is vipākacitta. As we have
seen, the vipākacittas which are the five pairs of sense-cognitions
(seeing, hearing, etc.) do not produce rūpa. The three mental feelings,
happy feeling, unhappy feeling and indifferent feeling, accompany
cittas which produce bodily rūpas. They condition the citta and other
cetasikas arising together with them and also mind-produced rūpa by way
of faculty-condition. At rebirth, feeling that accompanies the
vipākacitta which is rebirth-consciousness conditions that citta, the
accompanying cetasikas and rūpa produced by kamma by way of
faculty-condition. As we have seen, at that moment kamma produces rūpa.

We attach great importance to feeling, we let ourselves be carried away
by the feelings which arise on account of pleasant or unpleasant
objects we experience through the senses. If there would not be
feelings on account of what we see, hear or experience through the
other senses, there would not be so much sorrow in life. We are
enslaved to our feelings, but they are only realities which arise
because of the appropriate conditions and do not last.

As we have seen, some of the faculties are rūpa and some are nāma. The
faculties which are nāma condition other phenomena while they are
conascent with them. The faculties which are the five senses have to
arise prior to the nāmas they condition by way of faculty-condition.
Without the sense-faculties the different objects which impinge on the
senses cannot be experienced. Without the eye faculty visible object
could not appear and without the ear faculty sound could not appear.
The ``world'' appears through the six doorways because the faculties
perform their functions. So long as we do not distinguish the sense
faculties from each other we cling to a concept of self who can see and
hear at the same time. In reality there is only one citta at a time
which experiences one object. Each experience arises because of its
appropriate conditions and falls away immediately, it is non-self. The
following sutta stresses the importance of understanding the faculties
which are the senses and the mind. They have to be understood as
impermanent, dukkha and anattā. If they are not understood as they are,
one cannot attain enlightenment. We read in the ``Kindred Sayings'' (V,
Mahā-vagga, Book IV, Kindred Sayings on the Faculties, Ch III, paragraph 6,
Stream-winner):

@quotation

``Monks, there are these six sense-faculties. What are the six? The
sense-faculty of eye, that of ear, of nose, tongue, body and the
sense-faculty of mind. These are the six sense-faculties. When the
ariyan disciple understands, as they really are, the arising and the
perishing of, the satisfaction in, the misery of and the escape from
these six sense-faculties, such an ariyan disciple, monks, is called
‘Streamwinner (sotāpanna), one not doomed to Purgatory @footnote{Hell,
or hell planes. Existence in a hell plane is not eternal, therefore the
translator uses ``purgatory''.}, one assured, one bound for
enlightenment.' ''

@end quotation

Furthermore, there are five faculties sometimes referred to as
``spiritual faculties''. These are sobhana cetasikas (beautiful mental
factors) included in the ``factors of enlightenment'' (bodhipakkiya
dhammas) which should be developed for the attaining of enlightenment.
They are: faith or confidence (saddhā), energy (viriya), mindfulness
(sati), concentration (samādhi) and understanding (paññā). They control
the accompanying dhammas and mind-produced rūpa, they condition them by
way of faculty-condition. Among these five cetasikas energy and
concentration can be akusala or sobhana, the other three are always
sobhana, but as factors of enlightenment, all of them are sobhana. The
five ``spiritual faculties'' condition the mahā-kusala cittas,
mahā-vipākacittas and mahā-kiriyacittas they accompany and also mind
produced rūpa by way of faculty-condition.

When the five spiritual faculties are developed in samatha they lead to
the attainment of jhāna. When someone has accumulated skill in jhāna,
different stages of rūpa-jhāna and arūpa-jhāna can be attained. The
five spiritual faculties condition the rūpāvacara cittas and
arūpāvacara cittas by way of faculty-condition. They also condition
rūpa produced by these cittas, except in the case of arūpāvacara
vipākacitta. Arūpāvacara vipākacitta does not produce rūpa since it
arises in the arūpa-brahma planes where there is no rūpa. 

The five spiritual faculties are also developed in vipassanā. They
overcome their opposites. Faith or confidence in wholesomeness
overcomes lack of confidence. Wholesomeness cannot be developed when we
do not see its benefit. We may believe that we see the disadvantage of
anger, but in the different situations in daily life we are negligent.
Before we realize it we have spoken angry words and at such moments we
do not see the disadvantage of akusala, we have no confidence in
kusala. Kusala can be gradually developed; it can be accumulated, so
that there will be more conditions for its arising. Energy which is
wholesome overcomes indolence. The ``Book of Analysis''( Ch 5, 123, 124)
states about the faculty of energy:

@quotation

``Therein what is controlling faculty of energy? That which is the
arousing of mental energy, toiling, endeavour, aspiring, effort, zeal,
perseverance, vigour, stability, unfaltering endeavour, not
relinquishing wish, not relinquishing the task, firm hold of the task,
energy, controlling faculty of energy, power of energy. This is called
controlling faculty of energy.'' 

@end quotation

 There is no self who exerts energy, energy is a cetasika, a faculty,
arising because of its appropriate conditions. Energy is ``not
relinquishing the task''. When one develops insight energy is not
relinquishing the task of being mindful of nāma and rūpa, not shrinking
back from considering their characteristics over and over again. The
faculty of energy prevents one from losing courage even if one does not
see much result. We cannot expect spectacular results immediately. The
faculty of sati overcomes negligence of kusala, including negligence of
developing right understanding of nāma and rūpa. Concentration
overcomes distraction. In the development of insight it conditions the
citta to attend to the reality appearing at the present moment. One
should not force oneself to concentrate on any reality, because then
one is bound to cling to a concept of self who concentrates.
Concentration performs its function already while it arises together
with right understanding. The faculty of paññā overcomes ignorance of
the four noble Truths. The five spiritual faculties have to be
developed together so that the four noble Truths can be realized.

These faculties will not develop merely by having faith in one's
teacher, one has to develop them oneself. We read in the ``Kindred
Sayings'' (V, Book IV, Kindred Sayings on the Faculties, Ch V, paragraph 4,
Eastern Gatehouse) that the Buddha, while he was staying at Sāvatthī,
in Eastern Garehouse, asked Sāriputta:

@quotation


``Do you believe, Sāriputta, that the controlling faculty of faith@dots{} of
energy@dots{} of mindfulness@dots{} of concentration@dots{} that the controlling faculty
of insight, if cultivated and made much of, plunges into the Deathless,
has the Deathless for its goal, the Deathless for its ending?''

@end quotation



The ``Deathless'' is nibbāna. We read that Sāriputta answered:

@quotation


``In this matter, lord, I walk not by faith in the Exalted One, to wit:
that the controlling faculty of faith@dots{} of energy@dots{} of mindfulness@dots{} of
concentration@dots{} that the controlling faculty of insight, if cultivated
and made much of, plunges into the Deathless, has the Deathless for its
goal, the Deathless for its ending. 

They, lord, who have not realized, not seen, not understood, not made
sure of, not attained this fact by insight, such may well walk by
faith in others (in believing) that the controlling faculty of faith@dots{}
that of insight, if cultivated and made much of, may so end.

But, lord, they who have realized, seen, understood, made sure of, they
who have attained this fact by insight, such are free from doubt,
free from wavering, (in believing) that the controlling faculty of
faith, of energy, of mindfulness, of concentration, of insight, if
cultivated and made much of@dots{} will so end.

But I, lord, have realized it, I have seen, understood and made sure of
it, I have attained it by insight, I am free from doubt about it, that
the controlling faculty of faith, of energy, of mindfulness, of
concentration, of insight, does plunge into the Deathless, has the
Deathless for its goal, the Deathless for its ending.''

@end quotation



We then read that the Buddha approved of Sāriputta's words. 

We read in the same section of the ``Kindred Sayings'' (paragraph 10, Faith) that
the Buddha, while staying among the Angas at Market, asked Sāriputta:


@quotation

``Tell me, Sāriputta, could an ariyan disciple who is utterly devoted to,
who has perfect faith in the Tathāgata, could an ariyan disciple
have any doubt or wavering as to the Tathāgata or the Tathāgata's
teaching?''


@end quotation


Sāriputta said that the ariyan disciple who has perfect faith in the
Tathāgata could have no doubt as to the Tathāgata or his teaching and
that he develops the controlling faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, concentration and insight. We read that he said about the
controlling faculty of insight:


@quotation

``Again, lord, of a faithful ariyan disciple who is established in
mindfulness, whose thought is tranquillized, this may be expected: he
will fully understand: ‘A world without end is the round of rebirth. No
beginning can be seen of beings hindered by ignorance, bound by
craving, who run on, who fare on through the round of rebirth. The
utter passionless ceasing of ignorance, of this body of darkness, is
this blissful state, this excellent state, to wit:- the calming down of
all the activities, the giving up of all bases (for rebirth), the
destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.' His insight,
lord, is the controlling faculty of insight.

Lord, that faithful ariyan disciple, thus striving and striving again,
thus recollecting again and again, thus again and again composing his
mind, thus clearly discerning again and again, gains utter confidence,
when he considers: ‘As to those things which formerly I had only heard
tell of, now I dwell having experienced them in my own person: now by
insight have I pierced them through and see them plain.' Herein, lord,
his confidence is the controlling faculty of confidence.''

@end quotation



We then read that the Buddha approved of Sāriputta's words. 

We may find that the five ``spiritual faculties'' are still weak, and the
reason is that also in the past they were weak, they have not been
accumulated sufficiently. When we keep on listening to the Dhamma and
considering what we heard, the five ``spiritual faculties'' can develop.
They lead to the experiencing of the ``Deathless'', of nibbāna, but we do
not know in which life that will happen. It is useless to have desire
for the attainment of enlightenment, desire is counteractive to the
development of understanding. We should only be intent on our task of
this moment: developing more understanding of the reality which appears
now. 

There are three faculties which are lokuttara paññā. They control the
purity of understanding at the moment of enlightenment and they
condition the accompanying dhammas by way of conascent
faculty-condition. The first one is the faculty of
``I-shall-come-to-know-the-unknown''(an-aññātañ-ñassāmī't'indriya) and this is the lokuttara paññā which accompanies the magga-citta (lokuttara kusala citta) of the sotāpanna who attains
the first stage of enlightenment. There are four stages of
enlightenment: the stage of the sotāpanna (streamwinner), of the
once-returner, the non-returner and the arahat. The sotāpanna comes to
know what was not known before, nibbāna. Lokuttara paññā is conditioned
by the sobhana cetasikas which have been accumulated from life to life.
These cetasikas which are included in saṅkhārakkhandha (the khandha of
``formations'', consisting of all cetasikas except feeling and
remembrance, saññā) are supporting one another and together they
constitute the conditions for attaining enlightenment. It is
encouraging to know that all good qualities such as generosity,
patience and kindness, all the ``perfections'' @footnote{The Bodhisatta
developed the ``perfections'' during aeons, with the purpose of becoming
a Buddha. They are the following wholesome qualities: liberality,
morality, renunciation, wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness,
determination, lovingkindness and equanimity.} developed together with
right understanding, are never lost. They have to be developed life
after life and thus they can constitute the conditions for the
realisation of the four noble Truths later on. When enlightenment is
attained the lokuttara magga-citta eradicates defilements and
experiences nibbāna

The second faculty which is lokuttara paññā is the ``higher knowledge
faculty''(aññindriya) which accompanies the phala-citta (fruition
consciousness, lokuttara vipākacitta) of the sotāpanna, the magga-citta
and the phala-citta of the sakadāgāmī (once-returner who has realised
the second stage of enlightenment), and those of the anāgāmī
(non-returner, who has realised the third stage of enlightenment), and
also the magga-citta of the arahat. 

The third faculty which is lokuttara paññā is the ``faculty of him who
knows'' (aññātāvindriya) arising with the phala-citta of the arahat. 

These three faculties which are lokuttara condition the lokuttara cittas
and cetasikas they accompany by way of faculty-condition @footnote{
Realities can be considered under different aspects; they are a
condition for other realities in different ways. When lokuttara paññā
is considered under the aspect of faculty, as faculty-condition, there
are three kinds. Lokuttara paññā is also a condition as Path factor.}.
When the third lokuttara faculty arises there is nothing more to be
realized, all defilements have been eradicated.

When the characteristics of conditioned dhammas are not yet fully known
nibbāna cannot be realized. The ``five spiritual faculties'' have to be
developed during countless lives so that eventually the three faculties
which are lokuttara can arise.




















































@node Jhāna-Condition

@chapter Jhāna-Condition




The word jhāna has been explained as being derived from
''jhāyati'', to contemplate, or to think
closely of an object. Or else ''jhāyati'' can
mean to burn (from another stem, jhāpana, Vis. IV, 119), since the
jhāna-factors which are developed burn the
''hindrances'' (akusala cetasikas) away
@footnote{The Atthasālinī (Expositor, Part V, Ch I, 167), with regard
to contemplation of the object, uses the term upanijjhāna, and explains
this as twofold: as closely examining the object, which are the
meditation subjects of samatha; and as examining closely the
characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and anattā. Insight, the Path
and Fruition are called ``characteristic examining jhāna''.}.

In the development of samatha specific cetasikas have to be developed so
that jhāna, absorption, can be attained (``Visuddhimagga'', Ch IV). They
are the following five cetasikas:


@itemize @minus

@item 
applied thinking (vitakka)

@item 
sustained thinking (vicāra)

@item 
rapture or interest (pīti)

@item 
pleasant feeling (sukha)

@item 
concentration (samādhi)

@end itemize


These cetasikas are sobhana (beautiful) cetasikas that are jhāna-factors
assisting the citta to be absorbed in the meditation subject of jhāna.
They have to be developed together with paññā which knows how to
develop calm, so that absorption can be attained. When jhānacitta
arises there are no longer sense impressions and there is temporary
freedom from defilements. Jhānacitta is of a higher level of citta than
kāmāvara citta, citta of the sense sphere. 

The term jhāna in jhāna-condition is used in a wider sense than jhāna
developed in samatha by means of the jhāna-factors that are the sobhana
cetasikas mentioned above. The jhāna-factors that are jhāna-condition
for the citta they accompany are not only the sobhana cetasikas
developed in samatha; they arise with cittas which are kusala, akusala,
vipāka or kiriya. The jhāna-factors in the sense of jhāna-condition
assist the citta and the other cetasikas they accompany to be firmly
fixed on the object that is experienced. Without the assistance of the
jhāna-factors good or evil deeds cannot be performed. 

 The ``Dhammasangaṇi'' mentions in the ``Summary'' jhāna-factors arising not
only with the mahā-kusala cittas which are accompanied by paññā, but
also those arising with the mahā-kusala cittas which are unaccompanied
by paññā, ñāṇa-vippayutta, as well as those arising with each of the
akusala cittas @footnote{See paragraph 147 a and paragraph 397 a.}. 

We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation
Chapter, paragraph 431) that akusala jhāna-factors are related to their
associated aggregates (the other nāmakkhandhas @footnote{The citta
and cetasikas arising together with them.}) by jhāna-condition. 

There are seven jhāna-factors that are jhāna-condition and these include
the five types of cetasikas mentioned above, but in this case they are
not only sobhana cetasikas arising with sobhana citta. Summarizing
them, they are:


@itemize @minus

@item 
applied thinking (vitakka)

@item 
sustained thinking (vicāra)

@item 
rapture or interest (pīti)

@item 
pleasant feeling (sukha)

@item 
unpleasant feeling (domanassa)

@item 
indifferent feeling (upekkhā)

@item 
concentration (samādhi)

@end itemize


In this classification, pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling and
indifferent feeling are mentioned. Unpleasant feeling, domanassa, is
always akusala. Apart from domanassa, the other jhāna-factors can arise
with cittas which are kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. The five pairs
of sense-cognitions (seeing etc.) are not conditioned by jhāna-factors.
The jhāna-factors assist citta each in their own way so that citta can
be firmly fixed on an object.

Vitakka, applied thinking, ``touches'' the object which is experienced, it
leads citta to the object (Vis. IV, 88). When vitakka is akusala it is
wrong thinking. As to vicāra, sustained thinking, this has the
characteristic of ``continued pressure'' on the object, it keeps citta
``anchored'' on it (Vis. IV, 88). Vitakka and vicāra accompany all cittas
of the sense sphere, except the sense-cognitions and they condition the
citta by way of jhāna-condition, so that it is firmly fixed on the
object it experiences. Pīti, rapture, interest or enthusiasm, takes an
interest in the object, it ``refreshes'' citta and cetasikas (Vis. IV,
94). In the case of cittas of the sense sphere, kāmāvacara cittas, it
arises with all cittas which are accompanied by pleasant feeling. When
it is akusala it accompanies lobha-mūla-citta; it conditions the
lobha-mūlacitta by way of jhāna-condition. Sukha, in this context is
the same as somanassa, pleasant feeling. Sukha, pleasant feeling,
conditions the citta it accompanies by way of jhāna-condition.
Domanassa, unpleasant feeling, can only accompany dosa-mūla-citta,
citta rooted in aversion, and it assists the akusala citta to be fixed
on the object in an unwholesome way. Upekkhā, indifferent feeling,
which can be kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya, conditions the citta it
accompanies by way of jhāna-condition. Samādhi, concentration, is the
cetasika which is one-pointedness (ekaggatā). It has the function of
focussing on one object and it accompanies every citta; it can be
kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. It causes the citta to be
concentrated on the object it experiences. When samādhi is akusala it
is wrong concentration, micchā-samādhi, and when it accompanies sobhana
citta it is right concentration, sammā-samādhi. 

 The jhāna-factors condition the citta and cetasikas they accompany and
the mind-produced rūpa by way of jhāna-condition and also at the moment
of rebirth they condition the associated dhammas and kamma produced
rūpa by way of jhāna-condition (Paṭṭhāna, Faultless Triplet, VII,
Investigation Chapter, paragraph 431, VII a , b). 

The subcommentary to the ``Khandha-Vibhanga'' (Book of Analysis I)
explains the role of the jhāna-factors in relation to mind produced
rūpa @footnote{See ``Abhidhamma Studies'', IV, Mental Constituents, 3,
Factors of Absorption, by Ven. Nyanaponika.}. This subcommentary calls
the jhāna-factors ``strength-givers'' (bala-dāyaka), they are
intensifying factors which assist the citta and accompanying cetasikas
to be fixed on an object. The jhāna-factors vitakka and vicāra play a
specific role when citta produces speech-intimation. Do we know whether
kusala vitakka or akusala vitakka conditions speech-intimation? When
our objective is not dāna (generosity), sīla (morality) or bhāvanā
(mental development), we speak with akusala citta and this happens time
and again. When citta produces a facial expression of gladness, or when
we smile, the jhāna-factor sukha plays its specific role, the
jhāna-factor pīti (rapture) ``refreshes'' citta, in fact, all the
accompanying jhāna-factors condition citta, the associated cetasikas
and the rūpa produced by citta by way of jhāna-condition. When someone
commits an unwholesome deed, such as killing, the dosa-mūlacitta, citta
rooted in aversion, is conditioned by akusala jhāna-factors by way of
jhāna-condition. It is accompanied by akusala vitakka which thinks of
the object with violence, by vicāra which is occupied with the object
in an unwholesome way, by unpleasant feeling and by concentration which
causes the citta to be firmly fixed on the object. The akusala citta,
the accompanying cetasikas and also the mind-produced rūpa are
conditioned by akusala jhāna-factors,``strength-givers'' or intensifying
factors, by way of jhāna-condition. When we perform a generous deed,
the kusala citta and accompanying cetasikas and also the mind produced
rūpa are conditioned by sobhana jhāna-factors by way of
jhāna-condition. These dhammas are also conditioned by root-condition,
by faculty-condition and by several other conditions. Thus, as we have
seen, jhāna-factors are not only operating while one cultivates
samatha, they are conditions which function time and again in daily
life, no matter whether we perform wholesome or unwholesome deeds. 

The ``Visuddhimagga'' (Ch IV) mentions five jhāna-factors, in that case
sobhana cetasikas, to be developed in samatha with the purpose of
attaining jhāna. As we have seen, they are: applied thinking (vitakka),
sustained thinking (vicāra),rapture or interest (pīti), pleasant
feeling (sukha) and concentration (samādhi).

Paññā, right understanding, is indispensable in order to know the way to
develop calm with a suitable meditation subject and to know the
characteristics of those particular jhāna-factors. Paññā should know
precisely when kusala citta arises and when akusala citta. There are
forty meditation subjects of samatha and it depends on the individual
which subject is suitable as a means to develop calm (Vis. Ch IV-Ch X).


The sobhana jhāna-factors have each their own function in inhibiting the
hindrances so that calm can be developed. The hindrances are: sensuous
desire (kāma-cchanda), ill will (vyāpāda), sloth and torpor
(thīna-middha), restlessness and regret (uddhacca-kukkucca) and doubt
(vicikicchā). 

Vitakka, applied thinking, ``touches'' the meditation subject; it thinks
of it in the right way. Vicāra, sustained thinking, keeps the citta
``anchored'' on the meditation subject, reviewing it over and over again
so that citta will remain fixed on the meditation subject. Vitakka
inhibits the hindrances of sloth and torpor and vicāra inhibits the
hindrance of doubt. Pīti, enthusiasm, takes an interest in the
meditation subject so that one is not bored with it. It inhibits the
hindrance which is ill will. Sukha which is developed in samatha is
happy feeling concerning the meditation subject. It inhibits the
hindrances which are restlessness and regret (uddhacca and kukkucca). 

Samādhi, concentration, developed in samatha, is right concentration on
the meditation subject. It inhibits the hindrance which is sensuous
desire (kāma-cchandha). As calm grows samādhi also develops.
Concentration can be micchā-samādhi, wrong concentration, or
sammā-samādhi, right concentration. Without paññā which knows precisely
when kusala citta arises and when akusala citta, wrong concentration
can be taken for right concentration. Someone may mistakenly believe
that calm arises when he just sits and for example looks for a long
time at a kasina (disk) which is among the meditation subjects of
samatha. Instead of true calm which is wholesome, there is clinging to
quietness.

 Not merely intellectual understanding of the jhāna-factors is needed
for the development of calm but also right understanding which discerns
precisely their different characteristics when they arise. When one
underestimates the difficulty of developing jhāna, wrong concentration
is bound to arise. It is difficult to distinguish between different
jhāna-factors such as vitakka and vicāra. While we are thinking,
vitakka and vicāra perform their functions, they arise together; but do
we discern their different characteristics? Do we know the
characteristic of pīti, rapture, and can we distinguish it from sukha,
pleasant feeling? When we find out for ourselves how difficult it is to
distinguish between these jhāna-factors, we shall understand that a
high degree of paññā is indispensable for the development of the
jhāna-factors necessary for the attainment of the different stages of
jhāna. When someone has attained the first stage of rūpa-jhāna
@footnote{Fine-material jhāna. The meditation subjects of rūpa-jhāna
are still dependent on materiality, whereas the meditation subjects of
arūpa-jhāna, immaterial jhāna, are not.}, the rūpāvacara kusala citta
is accompanied by all five jhāna-factors and these condition that citta
by way of jhāna-condition. After having emerged from jhāna one has to
review the jhāna-factors with mindfulness and right understanding (Vis.
IV, 138). Also in samatha mindfulness and right understanding are
needed but the aim is not, as is the case in vipassanā, to see
realities as non-self. The aim of samatha is the temporary subduing of
attachment to sense objects. The jhāna-factors are progressively
abandoned as higher stages of jhāna are attained. A high degree of
paññā is needed which discerns how to abandon the jhāna-factors which
are more gross, so that higher stages of jhāna which are more refined
and tranquil can be reached. In the beginning vitakka, applied
thinking, and vicāra, sustained thinking, are still needed to become
absorbed in the meditation subject, but as calm develops, these factors
that are still gross can be abandoned. As higher stages are reached,
pīti, rapture, and happy feeling, sukha, can be successively abandoned. 

At the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna only the jhāna-factor samādhi is left
and the accompanying feeling is indifferent feeling, upekkhā. At this
stage calm is of a higher degree and then upekkhā, which is more subtle
than sukha, pleasant feeling, accompanies the jhānacitta. 

The arūpāvacara cittas (of arūpa-jhāna, immaterial jhāna) are also
accompanied by the jhāna-factor samādhi, and the accompanying feeling
is indifferent feeling. 

Jhāna-factors which are sobhana condition each kusala citta, and thus
they also condition the kusala citta which develops vipassanā by way of
jhāna-condition. In vipassanā the aim is not the suppression of the
hindrances as is the case in samatha. Some people think that the
hindrances have to be suppressed first before there can be right
understanding of nāma and rūpa. In vipassanā, however, right
understanding is developed of whatever reality appears, also when that
reality is a ``hindrance''. When it appears it does so because it is
conditioned. All conditioned realities have to be known as they are, as
non-self. At the moment of right understanding of the characteristic of
a hindrance such as desire or ill will, the citta is kusala citta and
at that moment no hindrance arises.

There is no rule that samatha should be developed before vipassanā can
be developed. Some people develop samatha, others do not, and this
depends on conditions. People are born with different inclinations,
different talents, different potentialities. Our life is an unbroken
series of cittas and thus, inclinations can be accumulated from one
moment to the next moment. The bhavanga-citta which succeeds the
paṭisandhi-citta is conditioned by that citta by way of
proximity-condition, anantara-paccaya, and each following citta is
conditioned by the preceding one by way of proximity-condition. Cittas
are conditioned by many different factors; there is no self who could
alter the cittas which arise. 

Lokuttara cittas are conditioned by sobhana jhāna-factors by way of
jhāna-condition. The jhāna-factors are included in the enlightenment
factors @footnote{Bodhipakkhiya dhammas, wholesome qualities which
should be developed for the attainment of enlightenment.} which
perform their functions so that enlightenment can be attained. The
magga-citta (lokuttara kusala citta) eradicates defilements in
accordance with the stage of enlightenment which is attained. The
jhāna-factors condition the lokuttara citta to be steadfast and highly
concentrated on the object which is nibbāna. Thus, nibbāna appears very
clearly to the lokuttara citta and there is a high degree of calm.

Some people who attain enlightenment have developed samatha and attained
jhāna, others have not. For those who have not developed jhāna before
attaining enlightenment, the lokuttara cittas are accompanied by the
jhāna-factors which are of the same degree as those of the first stage
of jhāna. These cittas experience nibbāna with absorption concentration
of the degree of the first stage of jhāna. 

For those who are proficient in jhāna and also develop insight,
jhānacitta can be the object of insight; jhāna is then the foundation
of insight. In that way they can become detached from the idea that
jhānacitta is self. We read in the ``Kindred Sayings''(III,
Khandhā-vagga, XXVIII, Kindred Sayings on Sāriputta, paragraph 1, Solitude)
about a conversation between Sāriputta and ānanda. We read that ānanda
said to Sāriputta:

@quotation


`` ‘Calm are your senses, friend Sāriputta, clear and translucent the
colour of your face. In what mood has the venerable Sāriputta been
spending this day?'

‘Friend, I have been dwelling aloof from passions, aloof from things
evil, with my thought applied and sustained ( with vitakka and vicāra)
in first jhāna, which is born of solitude and full of zest (pīti) and
happiness (sukha). To me thus, friend, the thought never came: It is I
who am attaining first jhāna, or It is I who have attained first jhāna,
or It is I who have emerged from first jhāna.' 

‘Surely for a long time have leanings to I-making, to mine-making and to
vanity been well rooted out from the venerable Sāriputta. That is why
it occurs not to the venerable Sāriputta: It is I who am attaining
first jhāna, or It is I who have attained first jhāna, or It is I who
have emerged from first jhāna.' ''

@end quotation



In the following suttas we read that Sāriputta did not take the higher
stages of rūpa-jhāna nor the stages of arūpa-jhāna for self. 

For those who are proficient in jhāna and attain enlightenment, the
lokuttara cittas can be accompanied by jhāna-factors of the different
stages of jhāna, depending on the stage of jhāna which was the basis of
insight just before enlightenment was attained. Since there are five
stages of jhāna, the eight types of lokuttara cittas @footnote{At each
of the four stages of enlightenment arise one type of lokuttara kusala
citta and one type of lokuttara vipākacitta.} can be accompanied by
jhāna-factors of the five stages of jhāna @footnote{See my ``Abhidhamma
in Daily Life'', Ch. 23. As regards the four stages of arūpa-jhāna, they
are accompanied by samādhi and upekkhā, indifferent feeling, just as in
the case of the rūpa-jhānacittas of the fifth stage.}, and thus there
can be forty types of lokuttara cittas instead of eight types. For
example, for someone who has attained enlightenment of the stage of the
sotāpanna, streamwinner, the lokuttara magga-citta (lokuttera kusala
citta) and the lokuttara phala-citta (fruition, lokuttara vipākacitta)
can be accompanied by jhāna-factors of one of the five stages of jhāna,
thus there can be ten types of lokuttara citta instead of two types.
And it is the same for the following three stages of enlightenment. The
degree and the amount of the jhāna-factors which condition a citta at a
particular moment are variegated, and this is dependent on many
different conditions. 

The magga-citta (path-consciousness) is followed immediately, in the
same process, by its result, the phala-citta (fruition-consciousness),
and then, after that process is over, other types of citta which are
not lokuttara but lokiya (worldly) arise. However, for those who are
proficient in jhāna, who have jhāna as basis of insight, and have
attained enlightenment with lokuttara jhānacittas, phala-cittas which
experience nibbāna can arise again, many times during their life. This
is not possible for those who attained enlightenment but who were not
proficient in jhāna and did not have jhāna as basis of insight.
However, for all those who have attained enlightenment defilements are
progressively eradicated depending on the stage of enlightenment one
has attained. 

A high degree of paññā is needed for the development of the
jhāna-factors so that jhāna can be attained. The disciples of the
Buddha who were able to do so had accumulated a high proficiency in
samatha during many lives. Instead of wishing for something that cannot
be reached we should pay attention to what can be done right now. We
can develop right understanding of the realities which have arisen
already because of their own conditions. This kind of understanding
leads to the eradication of defilements and that is the goal of the
Buddha's teachings.






























































































@node Path-Condition

@chapter Path-Condition 




In the case of path-condition, magga-paccaya, the cetasikas which are
called path-factors are the conditioning dhammas (paccayas) and these
are related to the dhammas arising together with them, the conditioned
dhammas (paccayupanna dhammas), by way of path-condition,
magga-paccaya. The path-factors which are path-condition are not merely
the factors of the noble eightfold Path which leads to enlightenment,
but the term path-factor should be taken in a wider sense. Path-factors
can be akusala cetasikas which constitute the wrong path, or they can
be sobhana cetasikas which constitute the right path. 

The path-factors which are akusala cetasikas support the akusala citta
and the other cetasikas they accompany to function as a path leading
downwards, to an unhappy rebirth. The akusala path-factors support the
akusala citta they accompany, for example, in killing or stealing. 

The path-factors which are sobhana cetasikas support the kusala citta
and the other cetasikas they accompany to function as a path leading to
a happy rebirth. They support the kusala citta they accompany, for
example, in the undertaking of dāna, the observing of sīla and in
bhāvanā. Or they function as constituents of the noble eightfold Path
leading to the end of the cycle of birth and death. 

In the ``Dialologues of the Buddha'' (III, no. 33, The Recital, VIII) the
path-factors of the wrong path are summed up as follows:

@quotation


``Eight wrong factors of character and conduct, to wit, wrong views,
thinking, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness,
concentration.''


@end quotation


Not all eight factors of the wrong path are cetasikas which are
path-condition. The four factors of wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood and wrong mindfulness are not among the akusala cetasikas
which are conditioning factors of path-condition. Wrong speech, wrong
action and wrong livelihood are not specific cetasikas; they comprise
different unwholesome actions motivated by akusala cetanā, unwholesome
volition, which accompanies akusala citta. Wrong mindfulness does not
function as path-condition; the cetasika mindfulness, sati, can only
accompany sobhana citta, it cannot be akusala. Wrong mindfulness is a
description of lack of mindfulness, lack of attention to kusala, of
lobha. 

The other four factors of the wrong path are the akusala cetasikas of
wrong view, wrong thinking, wrong effort and wrong concentration. These
cetasikas are conditioning factors of path-condition. We read in the
``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation Chapter, paragraph 432, IV)
that akusala path-factors condition the akusala citta they accompany by
way of path-condition. The text states: 


@quotation

``Faulty state (akusala dhamma) is related to faulty state by
path-condition. Faulty path-factors are related to their associated
khandhas @footnote{The akusala cetasikas which are factors of the
wrong path are included in the khandha of formations
(saṅkhāra-kkhandha, which is all cetasikas except feeling and saññā,
remembrance or perception). The associated khandhas are the akusala
citta and the other cetasikas they accompany.} by path-condition.''

@end quotation



Wrong view (micchā-diṭṭhi) is an akusala cetasika arising with four
types of lobha-mūla-citta @footnote{See Appendix 2.}. Someone has
wrong view about kamma and vipāka when he believes that good and bad
deeds do not produce their appropriate results. It is wrong view to
take realities for permanent or for ``self''. Wrong view conditions wrong
practice of the Dhamma, it conditions taking the wrong path for the
right path. This happens, for example, when someone believes that he
should not be aware of akusala, that akusala should be suppressed
before vipassanā can be developed. By understanding that akusala citta
is conditioned by numerous factors, some of which are stemming from the
past, and some of which are factors of the present, we can be reminded
to be aware of akusala in order to see it as a conditioned nāma, not
self. 

When someone teaches wrong practice, wrong view conditions the rūpa that
is speech intimation by way of path-condition. The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (in the
same section, paragraph 432, V), under the heading of akusala dhamma which
conditions indeterminate dhamma, states that akusala path-factors
condition mind-produced rūpa by way of path-condition. As we have seen,
indeterminate dhamma, avyākata dhamma, is neither kusala nor akusala;
it comprises vipākacitta, kiriyacitta and rūpa. In the following
definition indeterminate dhamma refers to rūpa. We read: 


@quotation

``(V) Faulty state (akusala dhamma) is related to indeterminate state by
path-condition.

Faulty path-factors are related to mind-produced matter by
path-condition.''

@end quotation



Wrong thinking (micchā-saṅkappa) is the cetasika vitakka, thinking,
which ``touches'' the object so that citta can cognize it. This factor
conditions the akusala citta and cetasikas it accompanies by way of
path-condition. 

Wrong effort (micchā-vāyāma) is viriya cetasika which is akusala. It
strengthens and supports the accompanying dhammas so that they can
perform their functions in an unwholesome way, it conditions them by
way of path-condition. 

Wrong concentration (micchā-samādhi) is ekaggatā cetasika which
conditions akusala citta to focus on the object in an unwholesome way,
it conditions the accompanying dhammas by way of path-condition. 

The factors of the wrong path perform each their own function as they
condition citta, cetasikas and mind-produced rūpa by way of
path-condition. The factors of the wrong path support by way of
path-condition the citta and the other cetasikas they accompany to
engage in wrong speech, wrong action and wrong livelihood. When we
slander, the factors of the wrong Path condition speech intimation by
way of path-condition. We can easily indulge in idle speech and this
may not seem to be harmful. However, one kind of akusala can lead to
other kinds of akusala by way of natural decisive support-condition,
pakatūpanissaya paccaya, as we have seen @footnote{See Chapter 8.}.
Any degree of akusala is dangerous. The study of the factors of the
wrong path can remind us to realize when we are on the wrong path which
leads downwards. 

Someone may take wrong effort for right effort and wrong concentration
for right concentration. He may, for example, try very hard to focus on
a particular object such as breath without right understanding of what
breath is: a rūpa which is tangible object conditioned by citta. Or
someone may think that he should try to concentrate on rūpas of the
body and that he in that way can experience the arising and falling
away of realities. The development of the eigthfold Path is the
development of right understanding of any reality which appears because
of conditions. If someone selects particular realities as objects of
awareness or if he tries to apply himself to certain techniques in
order to hasten the development of insight he is on the wrong path. 

The factors of the right path are the following sobhana cetasikas:

@itemize @minus
@item 
right view (sammā-diṭṭhi)

@item 
right thinking (sammā-saṅkappa)

@item 
right speech (sammā-vācā)

@item 
right action (sammā-kammanta)

@item 
right livelihood (sammā-ājīva)

@item 
right effort (sammā-vāyāma)

@item 
right mindfulness (sammā-sati)

@item 
right concentration (sammā-samādhi)
@end itemize




We read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, VII, Investigation
Chapter, paragraph 432) that the path-factors which are kusala condition the
citta and the other cetasikas they accompany by way of path-condition.
They also condition the mind-produced rūpa, which is indeterminate
dhamma (neither kusala nor akusala), by way of path-condition. The
Paṭṭhāna states this under the following three headings: kusala dhamma
conditions (other) kusala dhammas, kusala dhamma conditions
indeterminate dhamma (namely rūpa, produced by citta), kusala dhamma
conditions (other) kusala dhammas and indeterminate dhamma (rūpa,
produced by citta):


@quotation

``(I) Faultless state (kusala dhamma) is related to faultless state by
path-condition.

Faultless path factors are related to (their) associated khandhas by
path-condition.

(II) Faultless state is related to indeterminate state by
path-condition. 

Faultless path-factors are related to mind-produced matter by
path-condition.

(III) Faultless state is related to faultless and indeterminate state by
path-condition.

Faultless path-factors are related to (their) associated khandhas and
mind-produced matter by path-condition.''


@end quotation


The factors of the right path are sobhana cetasikas which condition
sobhana citta by way of path-condition. Thus, they condition sahetuka
cittas (cittas with roots). We read in the same section of the
``Paṭṭhāna'' (paragraph 432) that they condition mahā-vipākacittas (resultant
indeterminate) and mahā-kiriyacittas (functional indeterminate) by way
of path-condition:


@quotation

``Resultant indeterminate or functional indeterminate path factors are
related to (their) associated aggregates and mind-produced matter by
path condition.''


@end quotation


The sobhana pathfactors condition rūpāvacara cittas and arūpāvacara
cittas that are kusala vipāka and kiriya by way of path-condition.
They also condition lokuttara cittas by way of path-condition
@footnote{See Appendix 2 for details about these cittas.}. 

Not all path-factors arise with each kind of sobhana citta. Some types
of sobhana citta are accompanied by paññā and some are not. One may,
for example, perform deeds of generosity with right understanding or
without right understanding. When kusala citta without right
understanding arises, it is not conditioned by the path-factor
sammā-diṭṭhi. The performing of wholesome deeds without the development
of right understanding of nāma and rūpa can lead to a happy rebirth,
but it does not lead to the eradication of the wrong view of self and
of the other defilements, and thus, it does not lead to freedom from
rebirth. 

The path-factor sammā-diṭṭhi can have many degrees. It can be
intellectual understanding of kusala and akusala and their results, it
can be paññā which directly understands kusala as kusala and akusala as
akusala, or it can be right understanding of nāma and rūpa as non-self.
Only right understanding of the true nature of nāma and rūpa will lead
to detachment from the wrong view of ``self'' and from all realities, to
freedom from the cycle of birth and death. When the noble eightfold
Path which leads to the end of rebirth is being developed the object of
paññā is a nāma or rūpa which appears at the present moment. Through
mindfulness of realities appearing in our daily life sammā-diṭṭhi of
the eightfold Path can come to see them as they are, as non-self. 

Sammā-saṅkappa, right thinking, is vitakka cetasika which is sobhana. It
assists each kusala citta which is intent on wholesomeness, it
``touches'' the object of wholesomeness. It conditions sobhana citta by
way of path-condition. When right thinking is a factor of the noble
eightfold Path it has to accompany right understanding, paññā. Right
thinking ``touches'' the nāma or rūpa which appears so that paññā can
understand it as it is. As we have seen (in chapter 14), this cetasika
also functions as jhāna-condition for the accompanying dhammas. A
reality can condition other realities in more than one way. 

There are three cetasikas which are sīla, namely: right speech, right
action and right livelihood. They are actually the three abstinences or
virati cetasikas which are:

@itemize @minus

@item 
abstinence from wrong speech (vacīduccarita virati)

@item 
abstinence from wrong action (kāyaduccarita virati)

@item 
abstinence from wrong livelihood (ājīvaduccarita virati)

@end itemize

They may, one at a time, accompany kusala citta when the occasion
arises. They do not accompany each kusala citta. While we abstain from
wrong action or speech there can be awareness and right understanding
of nāma and rūpa. Paññā can realize that the cetasika which abstains
from akusala is non-self, that it arises because of its appropriate
conditions. 

The three abstinences which accompany cittas of the sense-sphere,
kāmāvacara cittas, arise only one at a time. When abstinence of wrong
speech arises, there cannot be at the same time abstinence from wrong
action. However, when lokuttara citta arises all three abstinences
accompany the lokuttara citta and then nibbāna is the object. The
abstinences which are lokuttara are the right speech, the right action
and the right livelihood of the supramundane eightfold Path. They
fulfill their function of path-factors by eradicating the conditions
for wrong speech, wrong action and wrong livelihood. Thus, the object
of the abstinences which are lokuttara is different from the object of
the abstinences which accompany cittas of the sense-sphere. The
path-consciousness, magga-citta, eradicates the tendencies to evil
conduct subsequently at the stages of enlightenment. The magga-citta
(path-consciousness) as well as the phala-citta
(fruition-consciousness), which is the result of the magga-citta and
immediately succeeds it in the same process, are accompanied by all
three abstinences. Right action, right speech and right livelihood do
not accompany the mahā-kiriyacitta of the arahat. He has eradicated all
akusala and therefore there is no need for him to abstain from akusala.
Neither do the three abstinences accompany jhānacitta since the
jhānacitta is remote from sense impressions and there is thus no
opportunity to abstain from the defilements connected with sense
impressions. 

Sammā-vāyāma or right effort is another factor of the right path. It is
viriya cetasika (energy or effort) which strengthens and supports the
accompanying dhammas so that they are intent on kusala. When it
accompanies right understanding of the noble eightfold Path it is
energy and courage to persevere being aware of nāma and rūpa which
appear one at a time through the six doorways. At the moment of
mindfulness of nāma and rūpa, right effort has arisen already because
of conditions and it performs its function; we do not need to think of
making an effort. When we think, ``I can exert effort, I can strive'',
with an idea of self who can do so, akusala citta has arisen with
clinging to reach the goal. Wrong effort may arise without our noticing
it. Right effort, when it accompanies right understanding, supports the
other factors of the eightfold Path, but we should remember that it
arises because of its own conditions, that it is non-self. 

We read in the ``Gradual Sayings'' (Book of the Threes, Ch V, paragraph 49, Ardent
energy):

@quotation


``Monks, on three occasions ardent energy is to be exerted. What three?

To prevent the arising of evil, unprofitable states not yet arisen; to
cause the arising of good, profitable states not yet arisen; to endure
bodily feelings that have arisen, feelings which are painful, sharp,
bitter, acute, distressing and unwelcome, which drain the life away.
These are the three occasions@dots{}

Now when a monk exerts himself on these three occasions, he is called
‘strenuous, shrewd and mindful for making an end of dukkha.' ''

@end quotation



This sutta reminds us that right effort has to accompany right understanding, so that all the conditioning factors leading to the end of
dukkha can be developed. Sickness and pain are bound to arise because
we are born; we cannot control our body. Also at such moments right
understanding can be developed. Then right effort performs its function
of supporting the associated dhammas.

Sammā-sati, right mindfulness, is non-forgetfulness of what is
wholesome. Mindfulness arises with each sobhana citta. There is
mindfulness of the levels of dāna, sīla and bhāvanā. When sati arises
it is a condition for seeing the value of kusala and the disadvantage
of akusala. We may have aversion towards someone else's words and
behaviour and we are about to answer back. But when mindfulness arises
and we see that aversion is ugly, we may refrain from speaking
unpleasant words. At such a moment we are considerate of the other
person's feelings and we do not think of ourselves. 

Sati of the level of satipaṭṭhāna is right mindfulness of the nāma or
rūpa which appears so that understanding of that reality as non-self
can be developed. Mindfulness does not last, it arises just for a
moment, but it can be accumulated. Mindfulness and right understanding
cannot arise without the appropriate conditions: listening to the
teachings as explained by the right friend in Dhamma, considering what
one has heard and applying it in daily life. Moreover, all wholesome
qualities developed together with satipaṭṭhāna are supportive
conditions for paññā. When we learn to be less selfish and develop
kindness, thoughtfulness and patience, these qualities support paññā to
become detached from the idea of self. Sati that accompanies right
understanding of the eightfold Path is a factor of the noble eightfold
Path.

Sammā-samādhi, right concentration, is another path-factor accompanying
sobhana citta. Kusala citta which is intent on dāna, sīla or bhāvanā is
accompanied by right concentration which conditions the citta and
accompanying cetasikas to focus on an object in the wholesome way.
Right concentration which is a factor of the noble eightfold Path has
to accompany right understanding of the eightfold Path. 

We read in the ``Kindred Sayings'' (V, Mahā-vagga, XLV, Kindred Sayings on
the Way, Ch III, Perversion, paragraph 8, Concentration) that the Buddha, while
he was at Sāvatthī, said to the monks @footnote{I used the translation
by Venerable Bodhi.} :


@quotation

``Bhikkhus, I will teach you noble right concentration with its supports
and accessories. Listen to that@enddots{}

And what, bhikkhus, is noble concentration with its supports and
accessories? There are@dots{}right view@dots{} right mindfulness. The
one-pointedness of mind equipped with these seven factors is called
noble right concentration ‘with its supports,' and also ‘with its
accessories' ''


@end quotation


When paññā realizes the true nature of the nāma or rūpa which appears,
right concentration assists the citta and the accompanying cetasikas to
cognize that object. As we have seen, right concentration also
conditions the sobhana citta and cetasikas it accompanies by way of
jhāna-condition. 

When right understanding of nāma and rūpa is being developed, the other
path-factors develop as well together with right understanding. Some
people believe that one should first develop sīla and samatha before
one develops vipassanā, right understanding of nāma and rūpa. All kinds
of wholesomeness are beneficial and they can be developed along with
right under- standing. However, there is no particular order according
to which different ways of kusala should be developed. It depends on
the accumulations of the individual, on natural decisive
support-condition, and on other conditions which type of kusala citta
arises at a particular moment. When right understanding of the
eightfold Path arises the object experienced at that moment is a nāma
or rūpa which appears. 

Paññā of the eightfold Path develops very gradually in the course of
countless lives. When we consider realities which appear in daily life
and begin to be mindful of them, right understanding of nāma and rūpa
develops. By the development of the eightfold Path enlightenment can
eventually be attained and defilements can be eradicated stage by
stage. The path-factors of the noble eightfold Path lead to deliverance
from the cycle of birth and death. When the last stage of
enlightenment, the stage of the arahat, has been realized, all
defilements are eradicated and there will not be rebirth for him. 

























@node Three Pairs of Conditions

@chapter Three Pairs of Conditions




There are six conditions which form three pairs and of each pair the two
conditions have characteristics opposite to each other. These
conditions are in part similar to previously mentioned conditions, but
they each manifest a different aspect of conditional relations between
realities. The three pairs are the following:



@itemize @minus
@item 
association-condition, sampayutta-paccaya

@item 
dissociation-condition, vippayutta-paccaya

@sp 1


@item 
presence-condition, atthi-paccaya

@item 
absence-condition, natthi-paccaya

@sp 1


@item 
disappearance-condition, vigata-paccaya

@item 
non-disappearance-condition, avigata-paccaya

@end itemize


With regard to association-condition, we read in the ``Paṭṭhāna'' (II,
Analytical Exposition of Conditions, 19):

@quotation


``The four immaterial aggregates (nāmakkhandhas) are mutually related to
one another by association-condition.''

@end quotation



Association-condition, sampayutta-paccaya, only pertains to nāma, to
citta and its accompanying cetasikas. We read in the ``Visuddhimagga''
(XVII, 94) about this condition:

@quotation


``Immaterial states (nāma dhammas) that assist by the kind of association
consisting in having the same physical basis (vatthu), the same object,
the same arising, the same cessation, are association-conditions,
according as it is said, ‘The four immaterial khandhas are a condition,
as association-condition, for each other' (Paṭṭhāna, I, 6).''


@end quotation


Seeing, for example, arises together with the associated cetasikas at
the same vatthu, the eye-base; seeing and the associated cetasikas
experience visible object through the eye-door and then they fall away
together. Citta and cetasikas condition one another by way of
association-condition, but they each perform their own funcion.
Seeing-consciousness cognizes visible object, it is the ``chief'' in
knowing the object. Feeling experiences the ``flavour'' of the object,
saññā marks or recognizes the object, and the other ``universals''
@footnote{The seven cetasikas which arise with each citta, namely,
contact, feeling, perception (saññā), volition, concentration,
life-faculty and attention.} perform their own functions. The eyesense
which is the base, the physical place of origin (vatthu) for seeing, is
also doorway (dvāra), that is, the means through which citta and
cetasikas experience the object. Only in the case of the five pairs of
sense-cognitions (seeing, hearing, etc.) the same rūpas, namely the
five senses, are both doorway and base. All the other cittas, apart
from the sense-cognitions, arise at the heart-base (hadaya-vatthu).
Each citta and its accompanying cetasikas arise together at the same
base, experience the same object and fall away together.

The citta and cetasikas which condition one another by way of
association-condition, sampayutta-paccaya, also condition one another
by way of conascence, sahajāta. However, association-condition is not
identical with conascence-condition. Conascence-condition also pertains
to rūpas which arise together and to nāma and rūpa which arise together
@footnote{See chapter 5.}. Association-condition, in contrast, only
pertains to nāmas, citta and cetasikas, which arise together and
condition one another. 

Association-condition manifests the close association between citta and
cetasikas. Although in the planes where there are five khandhas (nāma
and rūpa) citta and cetasikas arise together with rūpa, they are not
associated with rūpa in the same way as they are with each other.
Feeling, for example, is nāma, it is closely associated with citta and
the other cetasikas. When lobha-mūla-citta accompanied by pleasant
feeling enjoys a pleasant sound, the accompanying cetasikas share the
same object, and they are all affected by the pleasant feeling, they
are conditioned by it by way of association-condition. Citta and the
accompanying cetasikas are of a great diversity since each of them
conditions the other nāma-dhammas by way of association-condition.
Kusala citta which is accompanied by sobhana cetasikas is quite
different from akusala citta which is accompanied by akusala cetasikas.
Some cetasikas can accompany cittas which are kusala, akusala, vipāka
or kiriya, but they are of a different quality in each of these cases.
Effort or energy (viriya), for example, which is kusala, such as energy
for generosity or for awareness at this moment, is quite different from
energy which is akusala, such as wrong effort accompanying attachment.
Wrong effort arises, for example, when one tries very hard to
concentrate on particular objects of awareness in order to attain a
quick result of one's practice. 

As regards dissociation-condition, vippayutta-paccaya, we read in the
``Paṭṭhāna'' (II, Analytical Exposition of Conditions, 20):
@quotation

``The material states (rūpas) are related to the immaterial states
(nāmas) by dissociation-condition.

The immaterial states are related to the material states by
dissociation-condition.''
@end quotation




This condition is altogether different from association-condition,
because it pertains to rūpa which conditions nāma and to nāma which
conditions rūpa. The nature of nāma is completely different from the
nature of rūpa, they cannot condition one another by way of
association. They cannot be as closely associated as citta and cetasika
which are both nāma arising together at the same physical base,
experiencing the same object, and falling away together. 

In the case of dissociation-condition, the conditioning factor can arise
at the same time as the reality it conditions, it can arise before it
or it can arise after it. Thus, dissociation-condition can be
conascent, prenascent or postnascent. As regards conascent
dissociation-condition, when citta produces rūpa such as speech
intimation, that rūpa arises together with the citta, it is conditioned
by citta by way of conascence-condition and also by way of conascent
dissociation-condition. Although citta and the rūpa it produces arise
together, they are each of a different nature and therefore, they are
dissociated. 

In the case of prenascent dissociation-condition, the conditioning
factors, which are the sense-bases and the heart-base, have to arise
before the conditioned dhamma, the citta which is dependent on them;
thus, they condition citta by way of prenascent dissociation-condition.
 As we have seen, the heart-base at the first moment of life arises at
the same time as the paṭisandhi-citta @footnote{Both the heart-base
and the paṭisandhi-citta are produced by kamma at the same time. See
Ch. 5.}, it is conditioned by citta by way of conascent
dissociation-condition. During life, however, the heart-base arises
before the citta which is dependent on it @footnote{The rūpas which
are the five sense objects have to arise prior to the citta which is
dependent on them. They are external objects cognized by citta and the
relation between the object and citta is not that of
dissociation-condition. Therefore, they are not included in prenascent
dissociation-condition. See U Nārada, Guide to Conditional Relations,
Ch II, 20 c, Base-Prenascence-Dissociation.}. 

When we feel pain we can be reminded that the body-base (bodysense) is
rūpa which is dissociated from painful feeling which is nāma; the
body-base conditions the painful feeling by way of prenascent
dissociation-condition. When nāma and rūpa are not distinguished from
each other we cling to a ``whole'' of mind and body, we take them for
``mine'' or ``self'' and they seem to last. We keep on thinking of ``my
sensitive body'' and ``my painful feeling''. The body-base which is the
base for body-consciousness and the accompanying painful feeling, is
only an infinitesimal rūpa which arises and falls away. Painful feeling
does not last either, it falls away immediately. Thus, when we think of
our painful feeling it has gone already. Through satipaṭṭhāna one can
learn to distinguish the characteristic of nāma from the characteristic
of rūpa, and then we shall be less inclined to think of a self who
feels pain. 

We read in the ``Kindred Sayings'' (V, Book VIII, Kindred Sayings about
Anuruddha, Ch II, paragraph 10, Grievously afflicted): 

@quotation


``On a certain occasion the venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
in Dark Wood, being sick and grievously afflicted.

Now a number of monks came to visit the venerable Anuruddha, and on
coming to him@dots{} said this:

‘Pray what is the venerable Anuruddha's life, in that the painful
feelings that come upon him make no impression on his mind?'

‘Friends, it is because I dwell with my mind well grounded in four
arisings of mindfulness. That is why the painful feelings that come
upon me make no impression on my mind. What are the four?

Herein, friends, I dwell in body contemplating body, being ardent,
self-possessed and mindful. So with regard to feelings@dots{} mind@dots{} dhammas@enddots{}

It is because I thus dwell, friends, that the painful feelings that come
upon me make no impression on my mind.' ''

@end quotation



In the case of dissociation-condition which is postnascent, the
conditioning dhamma arises after the dhamma it conditions. We have seen
under the section on postnascence-condition, pacchajāta-paccaya (Ch 9),
that citta consolidates the rūpas of the body which have arisen
previously to it and have not fallen away yet. Citta also conditions
these rūpas by way of postnascent dissociation-condition. The citta
which conditions the rūpas of the body in this way is altogether
different from these rūpas, it is ``dissociated'' from rūpa. 

The second pair is presence-condition, atthi-@-paccaya, and
absence-@-condition, natthi-paccaya. With regard to presence-@-condition,
atthi-paccaya, the conditioning dhamma consolidates the conditioned
dhamma by its presence. The dhamma which conditions another dhamma in
this way can arise at the same time as the conditioned dhamma, it can
arise prior to it or after@tie{}it. 

In the case of conascent presence-condition, the same conditioning
dhammas and conditioned dhammas which are related by
conascence-condition, sahajāta-paccaya, are also related by conascent
presence-condition. As we have seen (in Ch 5), the dhammas that cause
the simultaneous arising of other dhammas condition those by way of
conascence. 

The following dhammas are mutually related by conascence-condition and
by conascent presence-condition: citta and cetasikas that arise
together; the four great Elements; the rebirth-consciousness and the
heart-base @footnote{When the conditioning dhammas and the conditioned
dhammas are mutually dependent, they are not only related by way of
conascence, but also by way of mutuality, aññamañña (see Ch 5).}. 

Furthermore, there are dhammas that condition other dhammas by way of
conascence-condition and by conascent presence-condition, without
their being mutually related in these ways. This is the
case for the following dhammas that are conascence-condition and
conascent presence-condition for the dhammas they condition: the
rebirth-consciousness for the rūpas other than the heartbase produced
by kamma at that moment @footnote{In the case of human birth, kamma
produces at the moment of rebirth three decads, groups of rūpa: one
with the heartbase, one with bodysense and one with sex. The
rebirth-consciousness arising at the same time as these rūpas
conditions them by way of conascence-condition. The
rebirth-consciousness and the heartbase are mutually dependent, but
this is not so in the case of the rebirth-consciousness and the other
rūpas produced by kamma at that moment.}; citta for the rūpa it
produces; the four great Elements of Earth (solidity), Water
(cohesion), Fire (heat) and Wind (motion) for the ``derived rūpas'', the
rūpas other than the four great Elements @footnote{In these cases
there is no mutual relationship: the citta that produces rūpa is not
dependent on that rūpa for its arising. Evenso, the four Great Elements
are not dependent on the conascent derived rūpas for their arising.}.


Conascent presence-condition seems to be identical with
conascence-condition. However, the teaching of conascent
presence-condition reminds us of the fact that the dhamma which
conditions another conascent dhamma is still present, that it has not
fallen away yet. 

As regards prenascent presence-condition, this pertains to the rūpas
which are bases, vatthus, and the rūpas which are the sense objects and
which condition the citta by way of object-condition. The rūpas which
are bases and objects condition citta after having arisen prior to it,
thus they are prenascent to the citta they condition @footnote{Rūpa
cannot at its arising moment condition citta since it is then too weak.
It can only condition citta after it has arisen, thus, at the moments
of its presence. Therefore, it has to arise prior to the citta it
conditions. Rūpa lasts as long as seventeen moments of citta. See
Appendix 1 for the process of cittas which experience a sense object.
}. 

The term prenascence-condition may not tell us whether a conditioning
reality is still present to the reality it conditions. The teaching of
prenascent presence-condition shows us that, although the conditioning
reality has arisen previously, it is still present when it conditions
another reality. Visible object conditions seeing by way of prenascent
presence-condition. It has arisen before seeing, but when it is
experienced by seeing it is still present. The other cittas of the
eye-door process also experience visible object which is still present.
Seeing arises at the eye-base and it is conditioned by this rūpa by way
of prenascent presence-condition. Learning about the base and the
object which condition seeing helps us to understand the truth of
anattā, non-self. There is no self who can cause eye-base and visible
object to arise at the right moment, prior to seeing, and to condition
seeing while they are still present. 

Presence-condition can also be postnascent. Citta consolidates rūpas of
the body which have previously arisen but have not fallen away yet by
way of postnascence-condition @footnote{See Ch 9.} and by way of
postnascent presence-condition. The teaching of postnascent
presence-condition shows us that citta and the rūpas of the body it
consolidates are still present to each other.

The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Faultless Triplet, Investigation Chapter, paragraph 435, VII,
d,e) mentions food and also physical life-faculty (rūpa-jīvitindriya)
separately under presence-condition. We read:


@quotation

``Edible food is related to this body by presence-condition.

Physical life-faculty is related to kamma-produced rūpa by
presence-condition.''


@end quotation


After edible food has been taken and it has pervaded the body, the
nutritive essence it contains supports the internal nutritive essence
present in the groups of rūpa of the body, so that new groups of rūpa
can be produced @footnote{Nutritive essence is one of the eight
inseparable rūpas present in each group of rūpas.}. When we consider
the relation of nutrition to the body, it helps us to see that life can
go on because of conditions. The rūpa which is nutritive essence
present in each group of rūpas of the body can produce new rūpas, but
it cannot do so without the support of the nutritive essence present in
food. Nutritive essence is one of the four factors which can produce
rūpas of the body, the other being kamma, citta and temperature. Edible
food conditions the rūpas of the body by way of presence-condition, it
supports and consolidates them. 

As regards physical life faculty, rūpa-jīvitindriya, this is always
present in the groups of rūpa produced by kamma. It does not occur in
the groups of rūpa produced by citta, heat or nutrition. Past kamma
which is one of the factors that produces rūpas of the body is not
present to those rūpas in the same way as the other three factors which
produce rūpas of the body: citta, temperature and nutrition. A deed,
done in the past has fallen away, but the intention or volition which
motivated that deed is accumulated from moment to moment. The force of
past kamma is carried on and therefore kamma still has the power to
produce rūpa at present. Since past kamma which produces rūpas, has
fallen away and is no longer present, rūpa jīvitindriya, life-faculty,
has a specific task: it maintains the life of the kamma-produced rūpas
it has arisen together with in one group. It supports and maintains
their life, it does not produce them. It maintains the other rūpas not
at the moment of their arising, but during the moments of their
presence, before they all fall away. Eyesense, for example, is produced
by kamma, and thus there must also be jīvitindriya together with it in
that group of rūpas produced by kamma. The same is true for the other
senses. 

We read about life faculty in the ``Visuddhimagga'' (XIV, 59):


@quotation

``The life faculty has the characteristic of maintaining conascent kinds
of matter @footnote{Life faculty arises together with other rūpas in a
group and it maintains these rūpas.}. Its function is to make them
occur. It is manifested in the establishing of their presence. And
although it has the capacity consisting in the characteristic of
maintaining, etc., yet it only maintains conascent kinds of matter at
the moment of presence, as water does lotuses and so on. Though dhammas
arise due to their own conditions, it maintains them, as a wet-nurse
does a prince@enddots{}''


@end quotation


 Life faculty takes as a ``wetnurse'' the place of kamma, the ``mother'', in
maintaining the life of the kamma-produced rūpas. Life faculty
maintains the life of the rūpas it arises together with in a group, it
consolidates them; it maintains the other rūpas, not at the moment of
their arising, but during the moments of their presence, before they
fall away together. Life faculty performs its task of consolidating
kamma-produced rūpas from birth to death, it conditions them by way of
presence-condition. 

Life faculty is a condition for distinguishing kamma-produced rūpa from
other kinds of rūpa. We cling to the body which is alive, we cling to
eyesense and earsense and take them for self. They are only elements
produced by kamma and maintained by life faculty, a kind of rūpa which
is not self. They arise only because there are the appropriate
conditions for their arising. When we lose eyesense or earsense it is
evident that there are no longer conditions for the arising of these
kamma-produced rūpas. 

As regards absence-condition, natthi-paccaya, this condition is similar
to proximity-condition, anantara-paccaya, and contiguity-condition,
samanantara-condition @footnote{See Ch. 4.}. The citta which falls
away conditions the arising of the next one by way of
proximity-condition and contiguity-condition. However, the next citta
can only arise when the preceding one has fallen away, when it is
absent. Absence does not mean that the citta was never there; it means
that the citta that has just fallen away assists by its absence the
citta arising next to it; after it has fallen away it gives the next
citta the opportunity to arise without any interval.

The ``Paṭṭhāna'' (Analytical Exposition, II, 23) refers to the arising and
falling away of cittas in contiguity; the citta with its accompanying
cetasikas that has just fallen away conditions the following citta with
its accompanying cetasikas by way of absence-condition: 

@quotation


``States, citta and cetasikas, which have just disappeared in contiguity,
are related to present states, citta and cetasikas, by
absence-condition.''


@end quotation


 Only one citta at a time arises and then falls away, but cittas succeed
one another from birth to death, and death is followed by rebirth. The
cycle of birth and death continues until all defilements have been
eradicated and one finally passes away.

The third pair of conditions is disappearance-condition, vigata-paccaya,
and non-disappearance-condition, avigata-paccaya.
Disappearance-condition is similar to absence-condition.
Non-disappearance-condition is similar to presence-condition. Similar
conditions have been given different names, ``as an embellishment of
teaching to suit the needs of those who are teachable'', the
``Visuddhimagga'' (XVII, 100) states. 

Disappearance-condition is similar to absence-condition but the word
disappearance helps us to understand that the absence of the
conditioning dhamma does not mean that it never was.
Disappearance-condition also refers to the condition whereby the citta
that has fallen away conditions the arising of the next citta. The word
disappearance helps us to understand that the preceding citta, which is
the conditioning dhamma, after it has reached its cessation moment,
gives the opportunity for the arising of the subsequent citta, the
conditioned dhamma, without any interval. As we have seen (Ch 5), each
moment of citta can be divided into three extremely short periods: the
moment of its arising, the moment of its presence and the moment of its
cessation. The preceding citta must have reached its cessation moment
so as to condition the subsequent citta since only one citta arises at
a time. 

Non-disappearance-condition is similar to presence-condition. In the
case of presence-condition the conditioning dhamma assists the
conditioned dhamma by its presence, and in the case of
non-disappearance-condition the conditioning dhamma assists the
conditioned dhamma by virtue of not having reached cessation. A dhamma
which has not yet disappeared can, while it is still present, condition
other dhammas. However, the conditioning dhamma cannot stay on, it has
to fall away. Just as in the case of presence-condition, the
conditioning dhamma can be prenascent, conascent or postnascent to the
dhamma it conditions by way of non-disappearance-condition.



@node Aspects of the Twenty-Four Conditions

@chapter Aspects of the Twenty-Four Conditions

																																	Summarizing the twenty-four conditions, they are:


@itemize @minus 

@item 
root-condition (hetu-paccaya)

@item 
object-condition (ārammaṇa-paccaya)

@item 
predominance-condition (adhipati-paccaya)

@item 
proximity-condition (anantara-paccaya)

@item 
contiguity-condition (samanantara-paccaya)

@item 
conascence-condition (sahajāta-paccaya)

@item 
mutuality-condition (aññamañña-paccaya)

@item 
dependence-condition (nissaya-paccaya)

@item 
decisive support-condition (upanissaya-paccaya)

@item 
prenascence-condition (purejāta-paccaya)

@item 
postnascence-condition (pacchājāta-paccaya)

@item 
repetition-condition (āsevana-paccaya)

@item 
kamma-condition (kamma-paccaya)

@item 
vipāka-condition (vipāka-paccaya)

@item 
nutriment-condition (āhāra-paccaya)

@item 
faculty-condition (indriya-paccaya)

@item 
jhāna-condition (jhāna-paccaya)

@item 
path-condition (magga-paccaya)

@item 
association-condition (sampayutta-paccaya)

@item 
dissociation-condition (vippayutta-paccaya)

@item 
presence-condition (atthi-paccaya)

@item 
absence-condition (natthi-paccaya)

@item 
disappearance-condition (vigata-paccaya)

@item 
non-disappearance-condition (avigata-paccaya)

@end itemize


The Buddha taught how every reality which arises is dependent on
conditions. These conditions are not abstractions, they operate now, in
our daily life. What we take for our mind and our body are mere
elements which arise because of their appropriate conditions and are
devoid of self. We should consider the conditions for the bodily
phenomena which arise and fall away all the time. At the first moment
of our life kamma produced the heart-base and other rūpas together with
the rebirth-consciousness, and throughout our life kamma continues to
produce the heartbase and the sense-bases. Not only kamma, but also
citta, heat and nutrition produce rūpas of the body. When we touch the
body hardness appears, but this is only an element which arises and
falls away; nobody can cause its arising and it does not belong to ``our
body''. Through awareness of realities we shall understand more clearly
the truth that what we call ``our body'' are fleeting elements which
arise because of their own conditions. 

The cittas which arise are dependent on many different conditions.
Cittas succeed one another without any interval. Seeing arises time and
again and after seeing has fallen away akusala cittas usually arise. We
cling to visible object, or we take it for a being or a person.
Defilements arise because they have been accumulated and they are
carried on, from moment to moment, from life to life. They are a
natural decisive support-condition, pakatūpanissaya-paccaya, for
akusala citta arising at this moment. Akusala has become our nature,
but if we see the disadvantage of akusala, there are conditions for the
development of right understanding which can eradicate akusala.

We are so used to the idea of seeing living beings, people and animals,
and we do not realize that we are deluded about reality because of our
accumulated ignorance and wrong view. When we watch T.V. and we see
people moving, we know that there are no people there. There are
rapidly changing projected images on a screen and this gives us the
illusion that there are people who are acting. These images are merely
different colours which appear through the eyesense; on account of what
we see we think of concepts, we think of people and things. The same
happens in real life. Seeing sees only visible object, and we take what
we see for people or things which last. Persons are not real in the
ultimate sense, no matter whether we see them on a screen or in the
world around us. The world with people, living beings or things is real
in conventional sense. 

The Buddha taught that there is ultimate truth
and conventional truth. We do not have to avoid thinking of
conventional truth, of concepts of people and things; we could not lead
our daily life without thinking of concepts and dealing with them. We
have to pay attention to the people we meet in our social life, we
could not give assistance to them without thinking of them in terms of
concepts. When we develop generosity we need to think of the gift we
wish to give and of the people to whom we are handing the gift. We
could not develop kindness and compassion without thinking of people.
However, we should know the difference between conventional truth and
ultimate truth. 

Right understanding can be developed so that it can be known when a
paramattha dhamma, an ultimate reality, is the object of citta and when
a concept. When we know that there is this person or that thing, we
should realize that citta has arisen and knows at that moment a
concept. The citta which thinks of a concept is a paramattha dhamma,
the concept itself is not. In our daily life the object of citta is
either a paramattha dhamma or a concept. The cittas which experience
sense objects through the six doorways experience paramattha dhammas,
but if satipaṭṭhāna is not developed it is not known that rūpas such as visible object or sound are paramattha dhammas. When satipaṭṭhāna is being developed a paramattha dhamma is the object of awareness, not a
concept. 

Only paramattha dhammas have the characteristics of
impermanence, dukkha and anattā, non-self, which should be realized as
they are, so that defilements can be eradicated. We may think of
concepts with kusala citta or with akusala citta. The Buddha and the
arahats also thought of concepts but they were not deluded about them,
they had no defilements on account of them. If we cling to concepts and
take them for things which really exist, which are permanent or self,
we are deluding ourselves. Clinging to concepts of person or self leads
to many other kinds of defilements, it leads to a great deal of sorrow.
 
When someone has lost a person who was dear to him, he seems to live
with his memories of the person he loved, he lives with his dreams,
with an illusion. However, also when a beloved person is still alive we
live with our dreams; we take the person we believe we see, hear or
touch for reality. Someone who is in love with another person is
actually in love with a concept he conceives of that person, with an
idealized image he has of that person. He may not have understanding of
realities, of the different cittas which arise because of their
approriate conditions. We may think of other people and have
expectations about them which cannot come true; this leads to sorrow.

We have learnt about nāma and rūpa and about the conditions for their
arising, but theoretical understanding is not enough. We should
consider ultimate realities in daily life. We tend to forget that
seeing is only a conditioned reality and that visible object is only a
conditioned reality, and therefore we are easily carried away by sense
impressions. It is beneficial to remember that seeing, hearing and the
other sense-cognitions are vipākacittas, cittas which are results of
kamma. They arise at their appropriate bases, vatthus, which are also
produced by kamma. These bases have to arise before the
sense-cognitions and they condition these by way of prenascent
dependence-condition. Visible object and the other sense objects are
rūpas which also have to arise before the sense-cognitions and which
condition these by way of prenascent presence-condition. Each reality
which arises does so because of a concurrence of different conditions
which operate in a very intricate way. 
We should not try to pinpoint
all the different conditions for the nāma and rūpa which appear.
However, the study of different conditions helps us to understand that
there isn't anybody who can control realities, that realities arise
because of their own conditions. Nobody can cause the arising of
seeing. There was also seeing in past lives and there will be seeing in
next lives. Seeing only sees visible object. The object of seeing is
always the same, visible object, but thinking thinks about what is seen
in various ways: with ignorance or with right understanding. We
ourselves and other people were different beings in past lives with
different ways of thinking and we shall be different again in lives to
come. We think with cittas conditioned by root-condition, hetu-paccaya;
these cittas can have akusala hetus or sobhana hetus. On account of
what is seen or heard there is happiness or sorrow, and we are ignorant
of realities. In being mindful of one reality as it appears through one
of the six doors, we shall know the difference between the moments of
mindfulness of a reality and the moments of thinking of an image of a
``whole'', a person or a thing. 

When there is right understanding of a reality as it appears one at a
time, we do not expect other people to behave as we would like them to.
Someone may insult us, but if we understand conditions for the
phenomena which arise, we shall be less inclined to blame that person.
When words of praise and blame are spoken to us, hearing the sound
is vipākacitta, result produced by kusala kamma or akusala kamma. When
we think about the meaning of the words which were spoken to us,
defilements tend to arise. 

As we have seen, even kusala can be a natural decisive
support-condition, pakatūpanissaya-paccaya, for akusala @footnote{See
chapter 8.}. When we perform good deeds we tend to cling to ``our
kusala'', we want to be a ``good person''. While we study the conditions
we learn that there are many factors which can condition akusala citta.
Sense objects can condition akusala citta by way of object-condition,
object predominance-condition or object decisive support-condition
@footnote{See chapters 2, 3 and 7.}. Akusala roots, hetus, condition
akusala citta by way of root-condition, hetu-paccaya @footnote{See
chapter 1.}. When akusala citta arises there is not only one type of
citta but seven types since each javana-citta conditions the next one
by way of repetition-condition, āsevana-paccaya @footnote{See chapter
10.}. When lobha-mūla-citta arises it can be the object of
lobha-mūla-citta which arises in another process, because we enjoy
having lobha, especially when it is accompanied by pleasant feeling. We
accumulate clinging from life to life; the lobha which arises now is a
natural decisive support-condition for lobha arising in the future. We
may have regret about our attachment and then attachment is the object
of dosa-mūla-citta with regret. Since we have accumulated such a great
deal of defilements, our speech is produced more often by akusala citta
than by kusala citta. We cling to speech and take it for self and
``mine''. However, as we have seen, it is citta which produces the rūpa
which is speech intimation and it arises at the same time. There is no
self who decides to speak and causes the arising of speech. Citta which
produces rūpa conditions rūpa in many different ways: by
conascence-condition @footnote{See chapter 5.}, by
dependence-condition @footnote{See chapter 6.}, by nutriment-condition
@footnote{See chapter 12. Citta is one of the three mental nutriments
and as such it can condition rūpa by way of nutriment-condition.}, by
faculty-condition @footnote{See chapter 13. Citta is mind faculty,
manindriya, and as such it can condition rūpa by way of
faculty-condition.}, by conascent dissociation-condition, by conascent
presence-condition and non-disappearance-condition @footnote{See for
these last three conditions chapter 16.}. Whwn kusala citta or akusala
citta produces rūpa, for example the rūpa which is speech
intimation, the accompanying roots condition that rūpa by way of root-condition @footnote{
See chapter 1.}. If citta is a predominant factor among the four
factors which can be conascent predominance-condition @footnote{See
chapter 3. Chanda, desire-to-do, viriya, energy, citta and vima@udotaccent{m}sa,
investigation of dhamma, are four factors which can be conascent
predominance-condition. Only javana cittas accompanied by at least two
roots can be predominance-condition.}, it conditions the rūpa it
produces by way of conascent predominance-condition. The study of
conditions makes it clearer to us that our life consists of fleeting
phenomena which arise because of their own conditions and that there is
no self who could control the events of our life.

There are many factors which condition akusala now and also in the
future; by learning about these conditions we acquire more
understanding of the danger of the accumulation of akusala. When we
have understood that akusala leads to dukkha, we shall not forget the
purpose of the study of Dhamma: the development of right understanding
which leads to the eradication of clinging to the wrong view of self
and of all defilements. 

The study of conditions helps us to have more understanding of the
factors which cause us to continue being in the cycle of birth and
death. Because of ignorance and clinging life has to go on and on,
until the cause of rebirth can be eliminated. There is no self who
chose to be in the cycle of birth and death and there is no self who
can eliminate the cause of rebirth. Everything occurs according to
conditions, but this should not lead to discouragement. When we listen
to the Dhamma and thoroughly consider it, we learn how to develop the
right conditions leading to the end of dukkha. 

In the ``Kindred Sayings''(I, Sagāthā-vagga, V, Suttas of Sisters, paragraph 9),
in the ``Selā-sutta'', we read that at Sāvatthī Māra addressed Sister
Selā:

@quotation

@sp 1
``Who was it that made the human puppet's form?

Where is the maker of the human doll?

Whence, tell me, has the puppet come to be?

Where will the puppet cease and pass away?''
@sp 1
Selā answered:

@sp 1


``Neither self-made the puppet is, nor yet

By other wrought is this ill-plighted thing.

By reason of a cause it came to be,

By rupture of a cause it dies away.

Like a certain seed sown in the field,

Which, when it comes upon the taste of earth,

And moisture likewise, by these two grows,

So the five khandhas, the elements,

And the six spheres of sense @footnote{āyatanas.}  even all these,

By reason of a cause they came to be;

By rupture of a cause they die away.

@sp 1


Then Māra the evil one thought: ‘Sister Selā knows me', and sad and
sorrowful he vanished there and then.''

@sp 1

@end quotation























@node Appendix 1

@unnumbered Appendix 1




Sense-door process and mind-door process of cittas
@sp 1



When a sense object, which is rūpa, impinges on one of the sensedoors,
it is experienced by several cittas arising in a sense-door process.
Rūpa lasts as long as seventeen moments of citta and then it falls
away. If rūpa arises at the moment of the ``past bhavanga'' and if the
sense-door process of cittas runs its full course, there are, counting
from the ``past bhavanga'', seventeen moments of citta. These seventeen
moments of citta are as follows:


@enumerate

@item 
atīta-bhavanga (past bhavanga) 

@item 
bhavanga calana (vibrating bhavanga) 

@item 
bhavangupaccheda (arrest bhavanga, the last bhavanga 
arising before the object is experienced through the 
 sense-door) 

@item 
five-sense-door-adverting-consciousness 
(pañcadvārāvajjana-citta), which is a kiriyacitta 

@item 
sense-cognition (dvi-pañcaviññāṇa, seeing-consciousness, 
etc.), which is vipākacitta 

@item 
receiving-consciousness (sampaṭicchana-citta), which is
vipākacitta 

@item 
investigating-consciousness (santīraṇa-citta) which is 
vipākacitta

@item 
determining-consciousness (votthapana-citta) which is 
kiriyacitta

@item 
javana-citta (''impulsion'', kusala citta or akusala citta in the
case of non-arahats) 

@item 
 `` ``

@item 
`` ``

@item 
 `` ``

@item 
 `` ``

@item 
 `` ``

@item 
 `` ``

@item 
 registering-consciousness (tadārammaṇa-citta) which is vipākacitta 

@item 
 registering-consciousness

@end enumerate


A sense-door process does not always run its full course. When a rūpa
impinges on one of the senses it may happen that more than three
bhavanga-cittas pass before the sense-door adverting-consciousness
arises, and then the process cannot run its full course, but it is
interrupted earlier, since rūpa cannot last longer than seventeen
moments of citta. The rūpa may have fallen away before the
tadārammaṇa-citta is due to arise, and in that case the javana-cittas
are the last cittas of that process. The process of cittas which
experience rūpa may also end its course with the votthapana-citta,
determining-consciousness, and then javana-cittas do not arise. Or it
may happen that the ``vibrating bhavanga'', bhavanga calana, succeeds the
past bhavanga, atīta-bhavanga, but that the arrest bhavanga,
bhavangupaccheda (last bhavanga before the stream of bhavanga-cittas is
arrested and a sense-door process begins), does not arise and then
there cannot be any sense-door process. In that case there is a ``futile
course''. 

 After a sense object has been experienced through a sense-door it is
experienced through the mind-door, and then that object has just fallen
away. Before the mind-door process begins there are bhavanga-cittas and
the last two of these are specifically designated by a name. There are
the following cittas: 


@itemize @minus

@item 
bhavanga calana (vibrating bhavanga)

@item 
bhavangupaccheda (which is in this case the mind-door through which
the cittas of the mind-door process will experience the object)

@item 
mind-door-adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta) 
which is kiriyacitta

@item 
7 javana-cittas

@item 
2 tadārammaṇa-cittas (which may or may not arise).

@end itemize


After the mind-door process has been completed there are bhavanga-cittas
again.



































@node Appendix 2

@unnumbered Appendix 2




Appendix to Ch 3, Conascent-Predominance-Condition. 

@sp 1


The cittas which can be conascent-predominance-condition for the
accompanying dammas, the cetasikas and mind-produced rūpa, are the
cittas which perform the function of javana (impulsion) in the process
of cittas and which are accompanied by at least two roots, hetus. 

Altogether there are fifty-five types of citta which can perform the
function of javana, but one of those is not accompanied by hetus,
namely, the smile-producing consciousness of the arahat (hasituppāda
citta). This is an ahetuka kiriyacitta which performs the function of
javana @footnote{Arahats do not laugh aloud, because they have no
accumulations for laughing, they only smile. When they smile it may be
motivated by sobhana kiriyacitta (kiriyacitta accompanied by wholesome
roots) or by ahetuka kiriyacitta which is called hasituppāda-citta.
This is the only kind of ahetuka kiriyacitta which can perform the
function of javana.}, but since it is ahetuka, without roots, it
cannot be predominance-condition. The two types of moha-mūla-citta,
cittas rooted in ignorance, cannot be predominance-condition either
since they have moha as their only root. Thus, out of the fiftyfive
types of citta which can perform the function of javana, there are
fiftytwo types of citta which can be predominance-condition. They are
the following types:


@itemize @minus
@item 
8 lobha-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in attachment

@item 
2 dosa-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in aversion

@item 
8 mahā-kusala cittas

@item 
8 mahā-kiriyacittas 

@item 
5 rūpāvacara kusala cittas 

@item 
5 rūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@item 
4 arūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item 
4 arūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@item 
4 magga-cittas (path-consciousness, lokuttara kusala citta)

@item 
4 phala-cittas (fruition-consciousness, lokuttara vipākacitta) 


@end itemize

Of the eight types of lobha-mūla-cittas, four are accompanied by wrong
view, diṭṭhi, four are without wrong view, four are accompanied by
pleasant feeling, four by indifferent feeling, four are unprompted,
four are prompted (induced by someone else or by oneself). Of the two
types of dosa-mūla-citta, one type is unprompted and one type is
prompted. 

Of the eight types of mahā-kusala cittas (kusala cittas of the
sense-sphere) and of the eight types of mahā-kiriyacittas (kiriyacittas
of the arahat which belong to the sense-sphere), there are four out of
the eight types which are accompanied by paññā, and four which are
unaccompanied by paññā, four which are accompanied by pleasant feeling
and four which are accompanied by indifferent feeling, four which are
unprompted, and four which are prompted. 

The five types of rūpāvacāra cittas (kusala cittas and kiriyacittas of
the arahat) are jhānacittas corresponding to the five stages of
rūpa-jhāna, and the four types of arūpāvacara cittas (kusala cittas and
kiriyacittas of the arahat) are jhānacittas corresponding to the four
stages of arūpa-jhāna. All jhāna-cittas are accompanied by paññā. When
jhāna is being developed there have to be one of the four predominant
factors which condition the accompanying dhammas by way of
predominance-condition. 

There are four types of magga-cittas, lokuttara kusala cittas
experiencing nibbāna, which correspond to the four stages of
enlightenment. The four types of phala-cittas are lokuttara
vipākacittas, the results of the magga-cittas. All lokuttara cittas are
accompanied by paññā. The magga-citta is succeeded immediately by
phala-citta within the process of cittas during which enlightenment is
attained; the phala-citta is the only type of vipākacitta which
performs the function of javana, and thus it can be
predominance-condition. Lokuttara citta does not arise without
conascent predominance-condition. 

 Thus, there are fiftytwo types of cittas performing the function of
javana which can be conascent-predominance-condition for the
accompanying dhammas: the cetasikas and mind-produced rūpa. The factors
chanda and viriya, when they are predominance-condition, can arise only
with these types of javana-cittas. As regards the factor vima@udotaccent{m}sa,
investigation of Dhamma, this is paññā cetasika and, as we have seen,
this does not arise with all sobhana cittas of the sense-sphere; all
jhānacittas and all lokuttara cittas, however, are accompanied by
paññā. Vima@udotaccent{m}sa can only be conascent-predominance-condition when it
accompanies those javana-cittas which are associated with paññā. 





@node Appendix 3

@unnumbered Appendix 3




Appendix to Ch 10, Repetition-Condition.
@sp 1



The javana-cittas which can be repetition-condition are the following: 


@itemize @minus

@item 
8 lobha-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in attachment

@item 
2 dosa-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in aversion

@item 
2 moha-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in ignorance

@item 
8 mahā-kusala cittas

@item 
8 mahā-kiriyacittas

@item 
1 hasituppāda-citta (ahetuka kiriyacitta, smile producing citta of
the arahat)

@item 
5 rūpāvacara kusala cittas 

@item 
5 rūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@item 
4 arūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item 
4 arūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@end itemize


In the process when jhāna is attained there arise, after the mind-door
adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta), first kāmāvacara
cittas before jhāna-citta arises. These are, in the case of
non-arahats, mahā-kusala cittas which experience the meditation subject
through the mind-door. These cittas are:

@itemize @minus
@item 
parikamma or preparatory consciousness

@item 
upacāra, which means proximity or access

@item 
anuloma, conformity or adaptation

@item 
gotrabhū, change-of-lineage, which overcomes the sense sphere

@end itemize


Each one of these is repetition-condition for the next one and the last
mahā-kusala citta in that process, the gotrabhū, conditions the
jhāna-citta by way of repetition-condition.

In the process during which enlightenment is attained, there are, after
the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, three mahā-kusala cittas accompanied by
paññā which clearly see the reality appearing at that moment as
impermanent, dukkha or anattā. These mahā-kusala cittas are: 

@itemize @minus


@item 
parikamma, preparatory-consciousness

@item 
upacāra, proximity or access

@item 
anuloma, conformity or adaptation

@item 
Anuloma is succeeded by gotrabhū or change-of-lineage, the last
kāmāvacara kusala citta before lokuttara cittas arise. The
change-of-lineage experiences nibbāna. 

@end itemize


Each of these mahā-kusala cittas is repetition-condition for the next
one. The last mahā-kusala-citta, the ``change-of lineage'', arising
before the magga-citta, conditions the magga-citta by way of
repetition-condition but the magga-citta itself is not
repetition-condition for the phala-citta. The phala-citta, which is
vipākacitta, is not repetition-condition either. 

Thus, there are 29 kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the sense-sphere, and 18
jhānacittas which can be repetition-condition. The lokuttara kusala
cittas, magga-cittas, and the lokuttara vipākacittas, phala-cittas, are
excluded.

@node Glossary
@unnumbered Glossary

@multitable @columnfractions .4 .6
@item  abhidhamma @tab the higher teachings of Buddhism, teachings on ultimate
realities 

@item adhipati-paccaya @tab predominance condition

@item adosa @tab  non aversion 

@item āhāra-paccaya @tab nutriment-condition 

@item ahetukacittas @tab not accompanied by``beautiful roots''
or unwholesome roots 
@item ājīva-duccarita @tab virati abstinence from wrong livelihood 
@item ākāsānañcāyatana @tab sphere of boundless space,
the meditation subject of the first immaterial jhānacitta 
@item akiriya-diṭṭhi @tab The view that there is no such thing
as kamma 
@item akusala citta @tab unwholesome consciousness 
@item akusala kamma @tab bad deed 
@item akusala @tab unwholesome, unskilful 
@item alobha @tab non-attachment, generosity 
@item amoha @tab wisdom or understanding 
@item anāgāmī @tab non-returner, person who has reached the
third stage of enlightenment, he has no aversion (dosa) 
@item anantara-paccaya @tab proximity-condition 
@item anantarika kamma @tab heinous crimes 
@item anattā @tab not self 
@item anicca @tab impermanence. 
@item aññamañña-paccaya @tab mutuality-condition 
@item aññindriya @tab The faculty of final knowledge , which arises at the
moment of the phala-citta, fruition-consciousness, of the sotāpanna,
and also accompanies the magga-citta and the phala-citta of the sakadāgāmī
and of the anāgāmī and the magga-citta of the arahat 
@item apo-dhātu @tab element of water or cohesion 
@item arahat @tab noble person who has attained the fourth and last stage
of enlightenment 
@item ārammaṇa @tab object which is known by consciousness. 
@item ariyan @tab noble person who has attained enlightenment 
@item āsevana-paccaya @tab repetition-condition 
@item atthi-paccaya @tab presence-condition 
@item avigata-paccaya @tab non-disappearance-condition 
@item balas @tab powers, strengths 
@item bhaṅgakhaṇa @tab dissolution moment of citta 
@item bhavangupaccheda @tab arrest bhavanga, last bhavanga-citta before
a process of cittas starts 
@item bhikkhu @tab monk 
@item bhikkhuṅnī @tab nun 
@item bhūmi @tab existence or plane of citta 
@item bodhisatta @tab being destined to become a Buddha 
@item Brahma @tab heavenly being born in the Brahma world, as a result of
the attainment of jhāna 
@item Buddha @tab fully enlightened person who has discovered the truth
all by himself, without the aid of a teacher 
@item Buddhaghosa @tab the greatest of Commentators on the Tipiṭaka,
author of the Visuddhimagga in 5 A.D. 
@item cakkhu @tab eye 
@item cakkhu-dhātu @tab eye element 
@item cetanā @tab volition 
@item chanda @tab ``wish to do'' 
@item citta @tab consciousness, the reality which knows or cognizes an object 
@item cutiicitta @tab dying-consciousness
@item dāna @tab generosity, giving 
@item diṭṭhi @tab wrong view, distorted view of realities 
@item domanassa @tab unpleasant feeling 
@item dosa @tab aversion or ill will 
@item gotrabhū @tab change of lineage, the last citta of the sense-sphere
before jhāna, absorption, is attained, or enlightenment is attained 
@item hadaya-vatthu @tab heart-base, rūpa which is the plane of origin
of the cittas other than the sense-cognitions. 
@item hasituppāda-citta @tab smile-producing-consciousness of an arahat 
@item hetu @tab root, which conditions citta to be``beautiful''
or unwholesome 
@item hiri @tab moral shame 
@item iddhipādas @tab four``Roads to Success'' 
@item indriya @tab faculty. Some are rūpas such as the sense organs,
some are nāmas such as feeling. Five 'spiritual faculties' are
wholesome faculties which should be cultivated, namely: confidence,
energy, awareness, concentration and wisdom. 
@item indriya-paccaya @tab faculty-condition  
@item issā @tab envy 
@item jāti @tab birth, nature, class (of cittas) 
@item javana @tab impulsion, running through the object 
@item javana-citta @tab cittas which 'run through the object', kusala citta
or akusala citta in the case of non-arahats 
@item jhāna @tab absorption which can be attained through the development
of calm 
@item jhāna-paccaya @tab jhāna-condition 
@item jivhā-viññāṇa @tab tasting-consciousness 
@item jīvitindriya @tab life-faculty or vitality 
@item kāma @tab sensual enjoyment or the five sense objects. 
@item kāmāvacara cittas @tab cittas of the sense sphere 
@item kamma @tab intention or volition; deed motivated by volition. 
@item kamma patha @tab course of action performed through body, speech or mind which
can be wholesome or unwholesome 
@item kamma-paccaya @tab kamma-condition 
@item kāya @tab body. It can also stand for the 'mental body', the cetasikas 
@item khandhas @tab aggregates of conditioned realities classified as five
groups: physical phenomena, feelings, perception or remembrance, activities
or formations (cetasikas other than feeling or perception), consciousness. 
@item kiriyacitta @tab inoperative citta, neither cause nor result 
@item kukkucca @tab regret or worry 
@item kusala citta @tab wholesome consciousness 
@item kusala kamma @tab good deed 
@item lakkhaṇa @tab characteristic, specific or generic attribute 
@item lobha @tab attachment, greed 
@item lobha-mūla-citta @tab consciousness rooted in attachment 
@item lokiya citta @tab citta which is mundane, not experiencing nibbāna 
@item lokuttara citta @tab supramundane citta which experiences nibbāna 
@item magga @tab path (eightfold Path) 
@item magga-citta @tab path-consciousness, supramundane citta which experiences
nibbāna and eradicates defilements 
@item magga-paccaya @tab  path-condition 
@item manasikāra @tab attention 
@item mano @tab mind, citta, consciousness 
@item māra @tab ``the evil one''-all that leads to dukkha 
@item mettā @tab loving kindness 
@item micchā-diṭṭhi @tab wrong view 
@item middha @tab torpor or languor 
@item moha @tab ignorance 
@item moha-mūla-cittas @tab cittas rooted in ignorance 
@item nāmakkhandha @tab group of all mental phenomena 
@item nāma @tab mental phenomena,including those which are conditioned
and also the unconditioned nāma which is nibbāna 
@item natthi-paccaya @tab absence-condition 
@item nibbāna @tab unconditioned reality, the reality which does not
arise and fall away. The destruction of lust, hatred and delusion.
The deathless. The end of suffering 
@item nissaya-paccaya @tab dependence-condition 
@item ojā @tab the rūpa which is nutrition 
@item paccayas @tab conditions 
@item pacchājāta-paccaya @tab postnascence-condition 
@item paṭiccasammuppada @tab  'Dependent Origination', the conditional
origination of phenomena 
@item paṭigha @tab  aversion or ill will 
@item Paṭṭhāna @tab Conditional Relations, one of the seven
books of the Abhidhamma 
@item Pāli @tab the language of the Buddhist teachings 
@item paññā @tab wisdom or understanding 
@item paññatti @tab concepts, conventional terms 
@item paramattha dhamma @tab truth in the absolute sense: mental and physical phenomena,
each with their own characteristic. 
@item pasāda-rūpas @tab rūpas which are capable of receiving
sense-objects such as visible object, sound, taste, etc. 
@item phala-citta @tab fruition-consciousness experiencing nibbāna.
It is result of magga-citta, path-consciousness. 
@item phassa @tab contact 
@item pīti @tab joy, rapture, enthusiasm 
@item purejāta-paccaya @tab prenascence-condition 
@item puthujjana @tab ``worldling'', a person who has not
attained enlightenment 
@item rūpa @tab physical phenomena, realities which do not experience
anything 
@item rūpāvacaracittas @tab rūpa-jhānacittas, consciosness
of the fine-material sphere 
@item saddhā @tab confidence 
@item sahajāta-paccaya @tab conascence-condition 
@item sakadāgāmī @tab once-returner, a noble person who has
attained the second stage of enlightenment 
@item samādhi @tab concentration or one-pointedness, ekaggatā cetasika 
@item samanantara-paccaya @tab contiguity-condition 
@item samatha @tab the development of calm 
@item sampayutta @tab associated with 
@item sampayutta-paccaya @tab association-condition 
@item saññā @tab memory, remembrance or ``perception'' 
@item saṅkhārakkhandha @tab all cetasikas (mental factors) except
feeling and memory. 
@item saṅkhāra dhamma @tab conditioned realities 
@item Sāriputta @tab The chief disciple of the Buddha 
@item sasaṅkhārika @tab prompted, induced, instigated, either by
oneself or someone else 
@item sati @tab awareness, non-forgetfulness, awareness of reality by direct
experience 
@item satipaṭṭhāna @tab applicatioms of mindfulness. It can
mean the cetasika sati which is aware of realities or the objects
of mindfulness which are classified as four applications of mindfulness:
Body, Feeling Citta, Dhamma. Or it can mean the development of direct
understanding of realities through awareness. 
@item satipaṭṭhāna sutta @tab Middle Length Sayings 1, number
10, also Dīgha Nikāya, Dialogues 11, no. 22 
@item sīla @tab morality in action or speech, virtue 
@item sobhana (citta and cetasika) @tab beautiful, accompanied by beautiful roots 
@item somanassa @tab happy feeling 
@item sotāpanna @tab person who has attained the first stage of enlightenment,
and who has eradicated wrong view of realities 
@item sukha @tab happy, pleasant 
@item sutta @tab part of the scriptures containing dialogues at different
places on different occasions 
@item Tathāgata @tab literally ``thus gone'', epithet
of the Buddha 
@item tejo-dhātu @tab element of fire or heat 
@item Theravāda Buddhism @tab  'Doctrine of the Elders', the oldest tradition
of Buddhism 
@item Tipiṭaka @tab the teachings of the Buddha 
@item uddhacca @tab restlessness 
@item upacāra @tab access or proximatory consciousness, the second javana-citta
in the process in which absorption or enlightenment is attained 
@item upanissaya-paccaya @tab decisive support-condition 
@item upekkhā @tab indifferent feeling. It can stand for evenmindedness
or equanimity and then it is not feeling 
@item vacī-duccarita virati @tab abstinence from wrong speech 
@item vacī viññatti @tab the rūpa which is speech intimation 
@item vāsanā @tab disagreeable habits accumulated in the past that
can only be eradicated by a Buddha. Even arahats who have eradicated
all defilements may still have a way of speech or action that is not
agreeable to others 
@item vatthu @tab base, physical base of citta 
@item vāyo-dhātu @tab element of wind or motion 
@item vedanā @tab feeling 
@item vedanākkhandha @tab group of all feelings 
@item Vibhaṅga @tab ``Book of Analysis'', one of the
seven books of the Abhidhamma 
@item vibhava-taṇhā @tab craving for non-existence 
@item vicāra @tab sustained thinking or discursive thinking 
@item vicikicchā @tab doubt 
@item vigata-paccaya @tab disappearance-condition 
@item vihiṁsā-vitakka @tab thought of harming 
@item vinaya @tab Book of Discipline for the monks 
@item viññāṇa @tab consciousness, citta 
@item viññāṇa-dhātu @tab element of consciousness, comprising
all cittas. 
@item viññnāṇakkhandha @tab all cittas (consciousness) 
@item vipāka-paccaya @tab vipāka-condition 
@item vipākacitta @tab citta which is the result of a wholesome deed
(kusala kamma) or an unwholesome deed (akusala kamma). It can arise
as rebirth-consciousness, or during life as the experience of pleasant
or unpleasant objects through the senses, such as seeing, hearing,
etc. 
@item vipassanā @tab wisdom which sees realities as they are 
@item vippayutta @tab dissociated from 
@item vippayutta-paccaya @tab dissociation-condition 
@item viriya @tab energy 
@item visaṅkāra dhamma @tab unconditioned dhamma (reality) 
@item Visuddhimagga @tab an encyclopaedia of the Buddha's teaching, written
by Buddhaghosa in the fifth century A.D. 
@item vitakka @tab applied thinking

@end multitable

@unnumbered Books


@section Books written by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 
@item 
@emph{The Buddha's Path} An Introduction to the doctrine of Theravada
Buddhism for those who have no previous knowledge. The four noble
Truths - suffering - the origin of suffering - the cessation of suffering
- and the way leading to the end of suffering - are explained as a
philosophy and a practical guide which can be followed in today's world.
@item 
@emph{Buddhism in Daily Life} A general introduction to the main ideas
of Theravada Buddhism.The purpose of this book is to help the reader
gain insight into the Buddhist scriptures and the way in which the
teachings can be used to benefit both ourselves and others in everyday
life.
@item 
@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life} is an exposition of absolute realities
in detail. Abhidhamma means higher doctrine and the book's purpose
is to encourage the right application of Buddhism in order to eradicate
wrong view and eventually all defilements.
@item 
@emph{The World in the Buddhist Sense} The purpose of this book is to
show that the Buddha's Path to true understanding has to be developed
in daily life.
@item 
@emph{Cetasikas} Cetasika means 'belonging to the mind'. It is a mental
factor which accompanies consciousness (citta) and experiences an
object. There are 52 cetasikas. This book gives an outline of each
of these 52 cetasikas and shows the relationship they have with each
other.
@item 
@emph{The Buddhist Teaching on Physical Phenomena} A general introduction
to physical phenomena and the way they are related to each other and
to mental phenomena. The purpose of this book is to show that the
study of both mental phenomena and physical phenomena is indispensable
for the development of the eightfold Path. 

@end itemize

@section Books translated by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 
@item 
@emph{Metta: Loving kindness in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. An introduction to the basic
Buddhist teachings of metta, loving kindness, and its practical application
in todays world.
@item 
@emph{Taking Refuge in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. Taking Refuge in Buddhism is an introduction
to the development of insight meditation.
@item 
@emph{A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas
is a guide to the development of the Buddha's path of wisdom, covering
all aspects of human life and human behaviour, good and bad. This
study explains that right understanding is indispensable for mental
development, the development of calm as well as the development of
insight.
@item 
@emph{The Perfections Leading to Enlightenment} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. The Perfections is a
study of the ten good qualities: generosity, morality, renunciation,
wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness, determination, loving-kindness,
and equanimity.
@end itemize
These and other articles can be seen at www.zolag.co.uk or www.scribd.com
(search for zolag).



 @bye
