Dear Sarah and Sundara,
I have to say something about the scriptures in my beginners book for India. So easily I can make mistakes when dealing with facts. Like the day of birth of the Buddha, different opinions exist. And about the commentaries. It has to be short and with very little Pali. If you and oters see mistakes, please tell me. I am grateful to hear about them.

Preface. 

It is difficult to understand the truth of life. The Buddha taught what life really is. It is said that the Buddha’s birth was about 623 B.C. His teachings are preserved in the scriptures which are: the Suttanta, the Vinaya or Book of Discipline for the monks and the Abhidhamma. These are called the Tipiìaka. After the Buddha’s passing away the Great Councils were held where the teachings and commentaries to them were rehearsed together by a group of five hundred perfected ones (arahats). The first Council was held shortly after the Buddha’s passing away, the second Council one century later and after that there was a third Council. The ancient commentaries date from the first Council. Nine centuries after the Buddha’s passing away the great Commentator Buddhaghosa wrote the “Visuddhimagga” (path of Purification) and compiled from earlier texts commentaries to the Tipitaka. 

I am using some terms of the Pali language which is the language of the scriptures called Theravada. You may be used to Sanskrit terms such as dharma or karma but in Pali the words dhamma and kamma are used. Most important are not the terms but what their meaning is in our life at this moment. 

In this book I also quote from some of my discussions with Khun Sujin, a wise Dhamma friend who always helps people to understand the Buddha’s words. I am happy to share with you what I learnt from her and also from my other Dhamma friends. Discussions about the Buddha’s teachings helps us to consider more deeply what he taught to us, the truth that is preserved in the scriptures even after many centuries. 

India became very dear to me when I visited together with Khun Sujin and other friends countless times the holy places of Lumbini, where he was born, Bodhgaya, where he attained enlightenment, Sarnath, where he began to teach Dhamma, and Kusinåra where he finally passed away.  

During our pilgrimages in India we talked about the Buddha’s life and about the perfections he accumulated as a Bodhisatta in the course of innumerable lives. This is also a way of paying respect to the Buddha. Contemplating the Buddha’s perfections can remind us to consider the reality appearing at the present moment. At each place we discussed the perfections, the wholesome qualities such as liberality, síla (good morality), patience or determination to continue consideringthe tuth of the teachigs. We also have to develop the perfections since they support the develpment of understanding of the truth the Buddha taught. If we have only theoretical knowledge of the Buddha’s teachings, acquired from reading, we cannot understand what he taught. During our pilgrimage to the holy places we talked about the eye, seeing and visible object; the ear, hearing and sound, and about the other realities appearing all the time in daily life, in order to have right understanding of them. 
