\input texinfo
@c $Id: cet.texi,v 1.13 2010/08/14 06:47:41 alan Exp alan $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename Cetasika.info
@settitle Cetasikas
@smallbook
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header 
@fonttextsize 10
@copying
Second edition published in 2010 by @*
Zolag @*
32 Woodnook Road @*
Streatham @*
London @*
SW16 6TZ @*
www.zolag.co.uk @*

ISBN 978-1897633-XXXX @*
@copyright{Nina van Gorkom} @*


This work is licensed under the: @*
Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. @*
To view a copy of this license, visit: @*
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/ @*
or send a letter to: @*
Creative Commons, @*
171 Second Street, @*
Suite 300, @*
San Francisco, @*
California, @*
94105, USA.@*

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data @*
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library @*
Printed in the UK and USA by Lightningsource. @*
$Id: cet.texi,v 1.13 2010/08/14 06:47:41 alan Exp alan $

@end copying
@setchapternewpage odd
@c @shorttitlepage Buddhism in Daily Life
@titlepage
@title Cetasikas

@author by Nina van Gorkom
Zolag 2010

Second Edition

@c The following two commands
@c start the copyright page.
@page

@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@ifnothtml
@contents
@end ifnothtml
@ifnottex

by Nina van Gorkom

Updated 11/8/10

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco, California, 94105, USA.

$Id: cet.texi,v 1.13 2010/08/14 06:47:41 alan Exp alan $
@node top
@top Contents

@end ifnottex
@menu
*  Preface::
*  Introduction::

PART I: The Universals

*  Contact ::
*  Feeling ::
*  Perception::
*  Volition::
*  Volition in the Cycle of Birth and Death::
*  Concentration ::
*  Vitality and Attention::

PART II: The Particulars

*  Applied thinking and Sustained thinking ::
*  Determination and Energy::
*  Right Effort of the eightfold Path::
*  Enthusiasm::
*  Zeal::

PART III: Akusala Cetasikas

*  Introduction to Akusala Cittas::
*  Ignorance Shamelessness Recklessness and Restlessness::
*  Attachment::
*  Wrong View ::
*  Conceit::
*  Aversion::
*  Envy Stinginess Regret::
*  Sloth Torpor and Doubt::
*  Different Groups of Defilements Part I::
*  Different Groups of Defilements Part II::
*  Different Groups of Defilements Part III::

PART IV: Beautiful Cetasikas

*  Beautiful Cetasikas::
*  Confidence::
*  Mindfulness::
*  Moral Shame and Fear of Blame::
*  Non-Attachment ::
*  Non-Aversion::
*  Equanimity ::
*  Six Pairs of Beautiful Cetasikas::
*  The Three Abstinences::
*  Compassion and Sympathetic Joy::
*  Understanding ::
*  The Stages of Insight::
*  Wholesome Deeds::
*  Appendix to Chapter 2::
*  Appendix to Chapter 5::
*  Appendix to Chapter 8::
*  Appendix to Chapter 9::
*  Appendix to Chapter 11::
*  Appendix to Chapter 12::
*  Appendix to Chapter 20::
*  Appendix to Chapter 31::
*  Stages of Insight::
*  Glossary::
*  Books::
@end menu
@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface

This book deals with the operations of the mind, citta, and its
accompanying mental factors, cetasikas. A detailed study of the many
types of cetasikas will help the reader to know his own defilements
and to develop good qualities and eventually, to eradicate all
defilements. Defilements and good qualities are different types of
cetasika. In this study I refer to my book @emph{Abhidhamma in Daily
Life} which deals with the basic points of the Abhidhamma. It is
useful to read this book first in order to understand my study on
cetasikas. 

The reader may wonder what the purpose is of the many Pāli terms used
in this book. In the course of his study he will see that the Pāli
terms are helpful for precision of understanding. I have used the Pāli
terms next to their English equivalents but the English terms often
have a specific meaning in the context of Western psychology or
philosophy. We should try to understand the correct meaning rendered
by the Pāli terms. 

In this study on cetasikas I have quoted from the first book of the
Abhidhamma, the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (Buddhist Psychological Ethics).
I also used Buddhaghosa's commentary to this book, the
@emph{Atthasālinī} (in English: The Expositor) and his encyclopedia on
Buddhism, the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (in English: The Path of
Purification). Buddhaghosa's commentaries date from the fifth century
A.D. He edited in Sri Lanka old commentary works with utmost
conscientiousness and translated them from Singhalese into Pāli. The
reader will be impressed by the discriminative, refined knowledge of
all the details of the Buddha's teachings and by the vivid way he
illustrates points of the teachings with examples. He continuously
points to the goal: the development of insight in order to see
realities as they are. I quoted from the suttas texts which deal with
the development of all kinds of kusala, comprising the development of
calm and the development of insight. These texts can encourage us to
keep in mind the purpose of our study. Some people believe that the
Abhidhamma, the teaching on ultimate realities, is not the original
teaching of the Buddha. The Buddhist scriptures, the Tipiṭaka, consist
of the Vinaya (book of Discipline for the monks), the Suttanta
(discourses) and the Abhidhamma. The Abhidhamma enumerates all
realities and the different conditions for the phenomena which arise.
In order to show that the different parts of the scriptures are one,
that they are the Buddha's teaching, I quoted also from the suttas
texts which deal with ultimate realities. There is also Abhidhamma in
the suttas. In the suttas we read time and again that the Buddha spoke
about ultimate realities appearing through the senses and through the
mind-door. In order to understand the suttas some basic knowledge of
the Abhidhamma is indispensable. As we study the Abhidhamma we will
become more convinced that the Abhidhamma pertains to our daily
life, that it teaches about the phenomena we can experience at this
moment. As we continue with the study of the Abhidhamma we will be
impressed by the depth of its teaching. No ordinary person could
conceive such a detailed exposition of everything which is real,
except an Enlightened One. 

The reader may find this book technical, but as he proceeds he will
find that a detailed study of realities helps him to understand his
daily life. 

I wish to express my deepest thankfulness to Ms. Sujin
Boriharnwannaket in Bangkok, who greatly assisted me in understanding
the Dhamma and its application in daily life. I based my study of
cetasikas on the lectures she held in the Saket Temple in Bangkok. I
also wish to express my appreciation to the ``Dhamma Study and
Propagation Foundation'' and to the publisher Alan Weller. With their
help the publication of this book was possible. All the texts from
which I quoted have been printed by the Pāli text Society@footnote{73
Lime Walk, Headington, Oxford OX 37, 7AD} . 

I will now continue with a general introduction in order to help the
reader to have more understanding of the nature of the cetasikas which
accompany the different types of cittas.

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@example
Not to do evil, to cultivate good, to purify one's mind, 
this is the teaching of the Buddhas.

    Dhammapada, vs. 183

@end example
The mind cannot be purified if we do not thoroughly investigate it.
When we try to analyse the mind it seems to escape us, we cannot grasp
it. The mind is variable, it changes very rapidly. At one moment
there is a mind with attachment, at another moment a mind with
generosity, at another moment a mind with anger. At each moment there
is a different mind. Through the Buddhist teachings we learn that in
reality the mind is different from what we mean by the word ``mind''
in conventional language. What we call mind are in reality different
fleeting moments of consciousness succeeding one another very rapidly.
Since ``mind'' has in psychology a meaning different from ``mind''
according to the Buddhist teaching, it is to be preferred to use the
Pāli term citta (pronounced: chitta). Pāli is the language of the
Buddhist scriptures of the Theravāda tradition. Citta is derived from
the Pāli word for thinking (cinteti). All cittas have in common that
they ``think'' of an object, but we have to take thinking here in a
very general sense, meaning, being conscious of an object, or
cognizing an object. 

The Buddha's teachings explain in a very precise way the objects
which, each through the appropriate doorway, can be cognized by citta.
For example, colour or visible object can be known through the
eye-door, sound through the ear-door. Through each of the senses the
corresponding object can be known. Through the mind-door all kinds of
objects, also concepts and ideas, can be known. Before we studied the
Buddhist teachings we had a vague, general idea of a thinking mind and
we did not have a precise knowledge of objects which are cognized each
through their appropriate doorway. Citta is varied because of the
different kinds of objects it experiences. Seeing is totally different
from hearing. 

Citta is varied because of the different mental factors or adjuncts
which accompany it in various combinations. The Pāli term cetasika
(pronounce: chetasika) is to be preferred to the English translations
of this term which vary in different textbooks. Cetasika means
literally: belonging to the mind (ceto). There are fifty two different
cetasikas which each have their own characteristic and function. Later
on I will explain the rational of these cetasikas and their
classification. There is only one citta at a time, cognizing one
object, and each citta is accompanied by several cetasikas which also
experience the same object, but which each perform their own function
while they assist the citta in cognizing that object. They arise and
fall away together with the citta. 

Citta and cetasika are mental phenomena, nāma, which are real in the
ultimate sense. Ultimate realities or paramattha dhammas have each
their own characteristic, their own function, they are true for
everybody. 

There are four paramattha dhammas:

@itemize 

@item
citta 

@item
cetasika

@item 
rūpa

@item
nibbāna 

@end itemize

Citta, cetasika and rūpa are saṅkhāra dhammas, conditioned dhammas;
they do not arise by themselves, each of them is conditioned by other
phenomena. Citta for example, does not arise by itself, it is
conditioned by the accompanying cetasikas. Nibbāna is the
unconditioned dhamma, visaṅkhāra dhamma or asaṅkhata dhamma; it does
not arise and fall away. Nibbāna is the object of the supramundane
citta, lokuttara citta, arising at the moment of enlightenment. What
we call in conventional language a ``person'' is in the absolute or
ultimate sense only citta, cetasika and rūpa. There is no lasting
person or ``self'', there are only citta, cetasika and rūpa which
arise and then fall away immediately. Citta and cetasika are both
nāmas, realities which can experience something, whereas rūpa does not
experience anything. 

Citta and cetasika arise together, but they are different types of
paramattha dhammas. In order to explain the difference between citta
and cetasika the commentary to the first book of the Abhidhamma, the
@emph{Atthasālinī}, uses the simile of the king and his retinue. The
king is the chief, the principal, and his retinue are his attendants.
Even so are the cittas which arise in our daily life the leaders in
cognizing the object, and the cetasikas are the assistants of citta.
The cetasikas have to perform their own tasks and operate at each
moment of citta. Citta with its accompanying cetasikas arise each
moment and then they fall away immediately. 

The reader may wonder what the use is of knowing the details about
citta and cetasikas. Citta and cetasikas are not abstract categories,
they are active at this very moment. We could not see, hear, think,
act, be angry or have attachment without cetasikas. Seeing, for
example, is a citta. It is the citta which cognizes colour or visible
object. In order to perform its function it needs the assistance of
cetasikas, such as contact, which contacts visible object, or
one-pointedness, which focuses on the object. It is important to have
more understanding of cetasikas. We should know that defilements are
cetasikas and that good qualities are cetasikas. They arise in daily
life and when they appear we should investigate their characteristics.
Otherwise we would not know what is right and what is wrong. We would
not know when defilements arise and how deeply rooted they are. If the
Buddha had not taught in detail about defilements we would only have a
vague idea about them. How could we see the danger of defilements when
they are unknown to us? How could we develop what is wholesome if we
would not know the characteristics of wholesome cetasikas and the
different ways of good deeds? There is a great variety of cetasikas
accompanying the different cittas. Akusala cittas are accompanied by
cetasikas which are defilements, whereas kusala cittas are accompanied
by cetasikas which are good qualities. Apart from defilements and good
qualities there are also cetasikas which accompany cittas which are
unwholesome, cittas which are wholesome and cittas which are neither
wholesome nor unwholesome. 

Citta and its accompanying cetasikas are closely associated and they
condition one another. There is a relationship and interdependence
between them. Citta conditions cetasikas. When the citta is wholesome,
kusala, all accompanying cetasikas are also kusala, even those kinds
of cetasikas which can arise with each type of citta. When the citta
is unwholesome, akusala, all the accompanying cetasikas are akusala.
Feeling, for example, is a cetasika which accompanies each citta. When
there is pleasant feeling, it can accompany kusala citta or akusala
citta rooted in attachment, but its quality is different in each case.
Cetasikas condition the citta they accompany, and the cetasikas which
arise together also condition one another. For example, the cetasika
understanding, paññā, conditions the citta and the other cetasikas it
accompanies. When the citta with generosity is accompanied by paññā
which realizes that generosity is kusala, the degree of kusala is
higher than in the case of kusala citta without paññā. 

When there is generosity, there is no person who is generous,
generosity is a cetasika performing its function while it assists the
kusala citta. When there is attachment, there is no person who is
attached, attachment is a cetasika performing its function. The
cetasikas which accompany the citta experience the same object as the
citta while they each perform their own function. At one moment there
can be attachment to colour which is experienced through the eye-door,
at another moment there can be attachment to sound which is
experienced through the ear-door, at another moment there can be
attachment to the concept of a person which is an object experienced
through the mind-door. Citta and its accompanying cetasikas arise and
fall away extremely rapidly. When right understanding has not been
developed we cannot distinguish between different objects experienced
through the different doorways. We are inclined to join different
realities together into a ``whole'', and thus we cannot realize their
arising and falling away, their impermanence, and their nature of
non-self. Through the study of the Buddhist teachings there can first
be more understanding of the true nature of realities on the
theoretical level. Only through the development of direct
understanding of realities one will know the truth through one's own
experience. 

There is no abiding ego or self who can direct the operations of the
mind. There is a different citta all the time and it is accompanied by
different cetasikas. They arise because of their own conditions. We
are so used to thinking in terms of a mind belonging to the human
person. It is difficult to understand that there is no ego who can
direct his mind, who can take his destiny in his own hands and shape
it. If everything is beyond control where is the human dignity? If one
walks the Buddha's Path one will know the difference between what is
true in the ultimate sense and what is only imagination or a dream.
There will be less delusion about the truth and there will eventually
be elimination of all that is impure and unwholesome. This is mental
emancipation and is that not the highest good one could attain?

The reader may find it cumbersome to know which types of cetasikas can
accompany which types of citta, and to learn the different
classifications of the groups of defilements. Such details, however,
help us to be able to see the danger of unwholesomeness and the
benefit of wholesomeness. When we know with what types of citta the
various cetasikas are combined we will come to understand the
underlying motives of our actions, speech and thought. Detailed
knowledge will prevent us from taking for kusala what is akusala. 

In order to help the reader to understand the variety of cetasikas
which accompany different cittas, I shall first summarize a few basic
points on citta I also dealt with in my @emph{Abhidhamma in Daily
Life}. 

Cittas can be classified in many ways and one of these is the
classification by way of ``jāti'' (literally birth or nature). Cittas
can be of the following four jātis:

@itemize 

@item
akusala

@item
kusala

@item
vipāka (result)

@item
kiriya (inoperative, neither cause nor result) 

@end itemize

The cetasikas which accompany citta are of the same jāti as the citta
they accompany. Some cetasikas accompany cittas of all four jātis,
others do not. 

Cittas arise and fall away very rapidly and we often do not know that
a different citta of another jāti has arisen after the present citta
has fallen away. For example, we may think that the present citta is
still vipākacitta, the result of kamma, when it is actually akusala
citta with attachment or with aversion on account of the object which
is experienced. Seeing, for instance, is vipākacitta. The moment of
seeing is extremely short. Shortly after it has fallen away, cittas
rooted in attachment, aversion or ignorance may arise and these are of
a different jāti: the jāti which is akusala.

Cittas perform different functions. For example, seeing is a function
(kicca) of citta. Seeing-consciousness which performs the function of
seeing arises in a process of cittas; it is preceded and followed by
other cittas which perform their own functions. Whenever there are
sense-impressions there is not merely one citta, but several cittas
arising in a process, and each of these cittas performs its own
function. It is the same with cittas arising in a mind-door process.
As for cittas which do not arise in either sense-door process or
mind-door process, they also have to perform a function. The
rebirth-consciousness (paṭisandhi-citta), the life-continuum
(bhavanga-citta) and the dying-consciousness (cuti-citta) do not arise
in a process of citta@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter
12.}. There are bhavanga-cittas in between the different processes of
citta. 

Summarizing the cittas which perform their functions in a sense-door
process and then in  the mind-door process@footnote{Ibidem, Chapter
15.} when a rūpa impinges on one of the sense-doors:

@itemize

@item
atīta-bhavanga (past bhavanga)

@item
bhavanga calana (vibrating bhavanga)

@item
bhavangupaccheda (arrest bhavanga, the last bhavanga arising
before the object is experienced through the sense-door)

@item
five-sense-door-adverting-consciousness (pañcadvārāvajjana citta)

@item
sense-cognition (dvi-pañcaviññāṇa, seeing-consciousness, etc. )

@item
receiving-consciousness (sampaṭicchana-citta)

@item
investigating-consciousness (santīraṇa-citta)

@item
determining-consciousness (votthapana-citta)

@item
7 javana-cittas (kusala cittas or akusala cittas in the case of
non-arahats), 

@item
2 registering-consciousness (tadārammaṇa-cittas which may or may
not arise). 

@end itemize

Then there are bhavanga-cittas and the last two of these, arising
before the object is experienced through the mind-door, are
specifically designated by a name. The process runs as follows:

@itemize

@item
bhavanga calana (vibrating bhavanga)

@item
bhavangupaccheda (which is in this case the mind-door through
which the cittas of the mind-door process will experience the object)

@item
mind-door-adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta)

@item
7 javana-cittas

@item
2 tadārammaṇa-cittas (which may or may not arise).
@end itemize

After the mind-door process has been completed there are
bhavanga-cittas again.

I think that it is useful for the reader to review the enumeration of
cittas I have given above, since I, in the following chapters on
cetasikas, shall refer to cittas performing different functions in
processes and to cittas which do not arise in a process. All these
cittas are accompanied by different types of cetasikas. 

The study of cetasikas will help us to have more understanding of the
intricate operations of the mind, of citta and cetasikas. It will help
us to understand in theory that citta and cetasikas act according to
their own conditions, and that an abiding agent who could direct
mental activities is not to be found. The study of the realities as
taught by the Buddha can remind us to investigate them when they
appear in our daily life. Theoretical understanding of the truth is a
foundation for the development of direct understanding of realities as
they present themselves one at a time through the six doors, through
the senses and the mind. Since the aim of the study of the Abhidhamma
is the development of right understanding of the realities of our
life, I refer in this book time and again to its development. Right
understanding of nāma and rūpa is developed by being mindful of them
when they appear. Sati, mindfulness or awareness, is a wholesome
cetasika which is non-forgetful, aware, of the reality which appears
at the present moment@footnote{I shall deal with sati in Chapter 26.
}. At the very moment of sati the reality which appears can be
investigated, and in this way right understanding will gradually
develop. Eventually nāma and rūpa will be seen as they are: as
impermanent and non-self. We should not forget that also awareness,
sati, is a cetasika arising because of its own conditions. If we have
understood this we shall not force its arising or try to direct it to
particular objects, such as this or that cetasika. The study of the
Abhidhamma can prevent wrong ideas about the development of the
Buddha's Path. The realities of our life, including our defilements,
should be understood as not self. So long as we take defilements for
self or ``mine'' they cannot be eradicated. The direct understanding
of realities as non-self is the condition for not doing evil, for
cultivating the good and for purifying one's mind. 

In the chapters which follow I shall deal with fifty two different
types of cetasikas. I shall first refer to seven types of cetasikas
which accompany every citta. These are the @emph{Universals.} Then I
shall refer to six types of cetasikas which can arise with cittas of
four jātis, cittas which are kusala, akusala, vipāka and kiriya
(neither cause nor result), but which do not accompany each citta.
These are called the @emph{Particulars} After that I shall deal with
the @emph{Akusala Cetasikas} and finally with the @emph{Beautiful
(sobhana) Cetasikas.} 

@unnumbered PART I:  The Universals

@node Contact 
@chapter Contact 
@section Contact (phassa)

A citta cannot arise alone, it has to be accompanied by cetasikas.
When there is seeing citta cognizes visible object and the cetasikas
which accompany the citta also experience visible object. The citta is
the ``leader'', while the cetasikas which share the same object
perform each their own task. The cetasikas have each their own
characteristic (lakkhaṇaṃ: specific or generic attribute), function
(rasa: function or achievement), manifestation (paccupaṭṭhāna:
manifestation, appearance or effect) and proximate cause
(padaṭṭhānaṃ)@footnote{Expositor I, Part II, Chapter I, 65}. There
are many conditions for the different phenomena which appear, but the
``proximate cause'' or immediate occasion is mentioned in particular
when the cetasikas are defined in the commentaries, the
@emph{Atthasālinī} (Expositor) and the @emph{Visuddhimagga}. There are
seven cetasikas which have to arise with every citta; they are called
the ``universals'' (sabbacitta-sādhāranā). Some cittas are accompanied
only by the universals, others are accompanied by several more
cetasikas in addition. Thus, every citta is accompanied by at least
the seven universals. 

The universals arise with every citta and thus they arise with all the
cittas of the four jātis: with akusala citta, kusala citta,
vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. They arise with all cittas in all planes
of existence where there is nāma: with the cittas of the woeful
planes, in the human being plane, in the deva planes, in the
rūpa-brahma-planes, except the asaññā-satta plane (the plane where
there is only rūpa not nāma)@footnote{See my Abhidhamma in Daily Life,
Chapter 20} and in the arūpa-brahma planes. They arise with all cittas
of all planes of consciousness: with kāmāvacara-cittas (sensuous plane
of citta), with rūpāvacara cittas (plane of rūpa-jhānacittas),
arūpāvacara cittas (plane of arūpa-jhānacittas) and with lokuttara
cittas (cittas which experience nibbāna)@footnote{Ibidem, Chapter
19}. 

Contact, in Pāli: phassa, is mentioned first among the universals.
Phassa arises together with every citta; it ``contacts'' the object so
that citta can experience it. When seeing experiences visible object,
phassa which accompanies seeing-consciousness also experiences visible
object but it performs its own function. At that moment phassa
``contacts'' visible object and conditions seeing-consciousness to
see. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (Expositor, Part IV, Chapter I, 108) states
about contact:

@quotation 
Contact means ``it touches''. It has touching as its
salient characteristic, impact as its function, ``coinciding'' (of the
physical base, object and consciousness) as its manifestation, and the
object which has entered the avenue (of awareness) as proximate
cause@footnote{See Dhammasangaṇi (the first book of the Abhidhamma),
par 2. This book has been translated by the Pāli Text Society under the
title of Buddhist Psychological Ethics.}.
@end quotation 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (Path of Purification XIV, 134) gives a
similar definition. 

Phassa is different from what we mean in conventional language by
physical contact or touch. When we use the word contact in
conventional language we may think of the impingement of something
external on one of the senses, for example the impingement of hardness
on the bodysense. We may use words such as touching or impingement in
order to describe phassa, but we should not forget that phassa is
nāma, a cetasika which arises together with the citta and assists the
citta so that it can experience the object which presents itself
through the appropriate doorway. When hardness presents itself through
the bodysense there is phassa, contact, arising together with the
citta which experiences the hardness. Phassa is not the mere collision
of hardness with the bodysense, it is not touch in the physical sense.
Impact is the function of phassa in the sense that it assists the
citta so that it can cognize the object. 

Phassa is manifested by coinciding or concurrence, namely, by the
coinciding of three factors: physical base (vatthu), object and
consciousness. 

When there is seeing, there is the coinciding of eye (the eyebase),
visible object and seeing-consciousness; through this concurrence
phassa, which is in this case eye-contact, is manifested. 

We read in the 'Discourse of the Honey-ball' (Middle Length Sayings I,
no. 18) that Mahā-Kaccāna explained to the monks concerning contact:

@quotation 

This situation occurs: that when there is eye, your
reverences, when there is visible object, when there is visual
consciousness, one will recognise the manifestation of sensory
impingement (phassa)@enddots{}
@end quotation

When there is the concurrence of the ear, sound and
hearing-consciousness, there is the manifestation of ear-contact. When
there is the concurrence of body-sense, a tangible object such as
hardness and the experience of hardness, there is the manifestation of
body-contact. Eye-contact is different from ear-contact and different
from body-contact. At each moment of citta there is a different phassa
which conditions the citta to experience an object. 

Phassa is not the doorway through which citta experiences an object.
In the case of a sense-door process the rūpa which is one of the
senses is doorway and in the case of a mind-door process nāma is
doorway, namely the last bhavanga-citta arising before the mind-door
adverting-consciousness, the first citta of the mind-door
process@footnote{See Introduction.}. 

In the planes of existence where there are nāma and rūpa, cittas have
a physical base or place of origin, the vatthu@footnote{Abhidhamma in
Daily Life, Chapter 17}. The vatthu is rūpa. In the case of the
'pañca-viññāṇas' (seeing, hearing, etc.) the vatthus are the
'pasāda-rūpas' (the rūpas which are capable of receiving visible
object, sound, etc.). In the case of the pañca-viññāṇas the
pasāda-rūpa functions as both vatthu and doorway, 'dvāra'. For
example, the rūpa which is eye-sense (cakkhuppasāda-rūpa) is both
doorway and vatthu for seeing-consciousness. Although it is one and
the same rūpa, the functions of dvāra and vatthu are different. The
dvāra is the means through which citta experiences an object, and the
vatthu is the physical base for the citta. Only for the pañca-viññāṇas
are the dvāra and the vatthu one and the same rūpa. For the other
cittas of the sense-door process the dvāra and the vatthu are
different rūpas; they have as their vatthu another kind of rūpa which
is in the commentaries called the 'heart-base'
(hadaya-vatthu)@footnote{Ibidem. It is the material support for all
cittas other than the pañca-viññāṇas. There is no need to specify its
exact location.}. The cittas which arise in the mind-door process also
have as their vatthu the 'heart-base'. The vatthu is the physical base
not only of citta, but also of the cetasikas which accompany the
citta. When seeing-consciousness arises at the eye-base
(cakkhu-vatthu), phassa and the other cetasikas which accompany
seeing-consciousness arise also at the eye-base. Thus, citta and the
accompanying cetasikas arise together at the same vatthu; they share
the same object and they fall away together. 

The different cittas with their accompanying cetasikas arise when
there are the appropriate conditions for their arising. Even when our
eyes are open, there is not seeing all the time. There are many
different types of cittas which arise one at a time. When there is,
for example, hearing or thinking there cannot be seeing at the same
time. When there are the appropriate conditions for
seeing-consciousness, it arises. Then there is the concurrence of the
eye, visible object and seeing. Eye-contact performs its function so
that seeing can experience visible object. 

Contact 'supports' the citta and the other cetasikas which accompany
the citta. There must be contact arising with the citta in order that
it can cognize its object. Contact also supports the other cetasikas
it arises together with: without contact there could not be feeling,
perception (saññā) or volition (cetanā). The @emph{Atthasālinī} (108)
compares phassa with a pillar in a palace which is a strong support to
the rest of the structure. In the same way contact is a strong support
to the citta and the accompanying cetasikas. 

Is there contact now? There is the experience of an object right now
and thus there has to be contact as well. There are seeing, hearing or
thinking occurring time and again. We think that it is 'I' who sees,
hears or thinks, but in reality there are different cittas conditioned
by different factors. Knowing more about the different factors
through which realities are conditioned will help us to understand
that there is no self who experiences an object. Seeing is a nāma
which arises because of the concurrence of different factors and it
cannot stay, it has to fall away again. We cannot force it to arise
nor can we force it to stay. 

When we are busy with our work, there are different realities
presenting themselves through the senses, but we are usually forgetful
of them. When hardness presents itself, phassa performs its function
so that citta can experience the object. There is no self who
experiences hardness. Considering realities can condition the arising
of mindfulness, no matter whether we walk, stand, sit or lie down. 

When we study cetasikas we should not forget that cetasikas never
arise alone; they have to arise together with citta. They arise with
the cittas of our daily life, they are not abstract categories. Since
citta and cetasikas which arise together condition one another, the
cetasikas and thus also phassa have different qualities when they
arise with different types of citta. Phassa which arises with akusala
citta is also akusala; phassa which arises with kusala citta is also
kusala. When phassa arises with lokuttara citta phassa is also
lokuttara: at that moment it 'contacts' nibbāna, the object of the
lokuttara citta. 

Phassa accompanies each of the cittas which arise in different
processes: in the sense-door processes and in the mind-door
processes@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 13}. Phassa also
accompanies the cittas which do not arise in a process of
cittas@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 17}, it accompanies
the paṭisandhi-citta (rebirth-consciousness) the bhavanga-citta
(life-continuum)@footnote{Bhavanga-cittas arise all through life, in
between the processes of cittas} and the cuti-citta
(dying-consciousness). Although these cittas do not arise in a
process, they experience an object: the same object as experienced by
the last javana cittas arising before the cuti-citta of the previous
life@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 15}. Phassa which
accompanies these cittas contacts that object. 

When there is seeing, visible object is experienced through the
eyesense and at that moment there is @emph{eye-contact}
(cakkhu-samphassa). Phassa is eye-contact only at the moment of
seeing-consciousness@footnote{At all the other moments of citta during
the eye-door process phassa is ``mind-contact'', mano-samphassa.}.
The phassa accompanying hearing-consciousness (sota-viññāṇa) is
@emph{ear-contact} (sota-samphassa). The phassas arising with the five
sense-cognitions (pañcaviññāṇa) are named after the relevant
sense-base@footnote{The phassas accompanying all the cittas other than
the five sense-cognitions are called mano-samphassa.}.

When the cittas of the sense-door process have fallen away, the object
is experienced through the mind-door. When the
mind-door-adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta) adverts to
the object through the mind-door the phassa accompanying the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta contacts that object. The
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is succeeded by the javana-cittas which
experience the same object and the phassas accompanying the
javana-cittas contact that object. 

The javana-cittas are, in the case of the non-arahats, either akusala
cittas or kusala cittas. Most of the time the javana-cittas are
akusala cittas; since we have accumulated many kinds of defilements
akusala cittas are bound to arise. When we, for example, see a
pleasant object, we are likely to be attached to it and to have
pleasant feeling on account of the object. However, attachment does
not arise at the moment of seeing-consciousness. Seeing-consciousness
is vipākacitta (citta which is result) and it is invariably
accompanied by indifferent feeling. The phassa which accompanies the
seeing-consciousness is also vipāka. When we like what we see there
are javana-cittas which are lobha-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in
attachment) and these may be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by
indifferent feeling. The phassa which accompanies akusala citta is
also akusala. The phassas which accompany different kinds of citta are
different and the feelings which accompany the cittas are different as
well. The following sutta in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (IV,
Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Third Fifty, Chapter
III, par 129, Ghosita) deals with realities as elements and it is
explained that different phenomena which arise have different
conditions. The sutta does not mention each moment of citta in the
process of cittas. It is understood that the pleasant feeling and
unpleasant feeling referred to do not arise at the moment of
seeing-consciousness, but later on in the process. We read:

@quotation 

Once the venerable Ānanda was staying at Kosambī in Ghosita
Park. 

Then the housefather Ghosita came to see the venerable Ānanda. Seated
at one side he said this to the venerable Ānanda:

'``Diversity in elements! Diversity in elements!'' is the saying, my
lord Ānanda. Pray, sir, how far has diversity in elements been spoken
of by the Exalted One?'

'When the elements of eye and objects that are pleasing and
eye-consciousness occur together, housefather, owing to the
pleasurable contact there arises pleasant feeling. When the elements
of eye, objects that are displeasing and eye-consciousness occur
together, owing to the unpleasant contact resulting there arises
painful feeling. When the elements of eye, objects that are of
indifferent effect and eye-consciousness occur together, owing to
neutral contact resulting, there arises feeling that is neutral. 

So when the elements of ear@dots{}nose@dots{}tongue@dots{}
body@dots{}when the elements of mind and objects that are pleasurable
and mindconsciousness occur together. 

When mind and objects that are displeasing@dots{}or mind and objects
that are of indifferent effect occur together, owing to the contact
resulting, whether it be pleasing, displeasing or neutral, there
arises feeling that is pleasing, displeasing or neutral. 

Thus far, housefather, diversity in elements has been spoken of by the
Exalted One. 
@end quotation

When we read this sutta we can be reminded to see phenomena as
elements which arise dependent on conditions. Sometimes the object
which phassa contacts is pleasant, sometimes unpleasant; this is
beyond control. Because of our defilements, attachment, aversion and
ignorance arise time and again. If we learn to see the events of our
life as conditioned elements, right understanding will develop. 

We have different contacts through the eyes and through the ears. When
we are at the opera, we may dislike the sight of someone who is
singing but we may like the sound. There are different objects and
different contacts; there can be like and dislike at different
moments. In reality there is no singer nor is there a person who can
look at him and listen to his singing at the same time. There are only
different elements, nāmas and rūpas, which each have their appropriate
conditions for their arising and can only be experienced @emph{one at
a time.}

The citta and the accompanying cetasikas which experience visible
object arise at one moment; the citta and the accompanying cetasikas
which experience sound arise at another moment, in another process of
cittas. The dislike of visible object cannot arise at the same time
as the attachment to the sound; they arise in different processes of
cittas. Cittas succeed one another very rapidly and at each moment
there is a different contact accompanying the citta. Because of
ignorance we do not know the reality which is experienced at the
present moment. We do not know whether it is sound, visible object or
a concept. We think that all these realities can appear at the same
time. We think most of the time of concepts instead of being aware of
realities as they appear one at a time. 

The study of phassa cetasika can remind us that at each moment a
different citta arises, dependant on different conditions. When there
is seeing phassa cannot contact any other object but visible object.
Seeing can experience only visible object; it cannot experience a
person in the visible object. When there is hearing, phassa cannot
contact any other object but sound. Hearing cannot experience a person
in the sound. When there is thinking of a concept there is a different
citta with a different phassa which contacts the object citta is
thinking of. There cannot be more than one contact at a time. 

A detailed knowledge of different cittas and their accompanying
cetasikas will help us to understand the realities of our daily life
as they appear one at a time. It is important to have more
understanding of realities such as seeing or hearing. They are cittas
arising time and again in daily life. They experience pleasant or
unpleasant objects and on account of these objects kusala cittas or
akusala cittas arise, but mostly akusala cittas. Through the
Abhidhamma we acquire a more precise knowledge of realities, but the
knowledge should not stay at the level of theory. When we study the
Abhidhamma we can be reminded to be aware of whatever reality appears
at the present moment, and in this way the study will lead us to
realize fully the aim of the Buddha's teachings: right understanding
of realities. 

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
How can we prove that there is contact? 

@item
Through how many doors is there phassa? 

@item
Is phassa nāma or rūpa?

@item
What is the difference between eye-contact and the eye- door?

@item
Are 'mano-samphassa' (mind-contact) and the mind-door different
from each other? 

@item
Why is there not eye-contact every moment our
eyes are open? 

@item
What kind of object does phassa contact when
there is bhavanga-citta? 

@item
When a loud noise hurts our ears,
through which doorway is it felt? What kind of object is experienced
at that moment? Can other realities apart from sound be experienced
through the ear-sense? 

@item
Why is it useful to know that phassa
contacts only one object? 

@item
Is a concept an object that phassa
can contact? 

@item
Why must there be phassa with every citta?
@end enumerate

@node Feeling 
@chapter Feeling 

@section Feeling (vedanā)
Feeling, in Pāli vedanā, is another cetasika among the seven
'universals'. Feeling accompanies every citta, there is no moment
without feeling. 

We may think that we all know what feeling is and we believe that it
is easy to recognize pleasant feeling and unpleasant feeling. However,
do we really know the @emph{characteristic of feeling} when it appears
or do we merely think of a concept of feeling? Throughout our life we
have seen ourselves as a 'whole' of mind and body; also when we
consider our feelings we think of this 'whole' which we take for
'self'. When someone asks us: 'How do you feel?' and we answer, for
example, 'I am happy', we do not know the characteristic of happy
feeling, which is a mental phenomenon, a nāma; we cling to the 'whole'
of mind and body. Thus we only know concepts, not realities. 

Is there feeling now? We think that we can recognize pleasant feeling
or unpleasant feeling, but are we not mixing up feeling with bodily
phenomena? Feeling is nāma, quite different from rūpa. So long as we
do not distinguish nāma from rūpa we cannot know the characteristic of
feeling as it is. 

When we study the Abhidhamma we learn that 'vedanā' is not the same as
what we mean by feeling in conventional language. Feeling is nāma, it
experiences something. Feeling never arises alone; it accompanies
citta and other cetasikas and it is conditioned by them. Thus, feeling
is a conditioned nāma. Citta does not feel, it cognizes the object and
vedanā feels. 

Feeling accompanies all cittas of the four jātis: akusala citta,
kusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. Feeling is of the same jāti
as the citta it accompanies. The feeling which accompanies, for
example, akusala citta is also akusala and entirely different from the
feeling which accompanies vipākacitta. Since there are many different
types of citta there is a great variety of feeling. Although there are
many kinds of feeling, they have one characteristic in common: they
all are the paramattha dhamma, non-self, which feels. 

All feelings have the function of @emph{experiencing the taste, the
flavour of an object} (@emph{Atthasālinī}, I, Part IV, Chapter I,
109). The @emph{Atthasālinī} uses a simile in order to illustrate that
feeling experiences the taste of an object and that citta and the
other cetasikas which arise together with feeling experience the taste
only partially. A cook who has prepared a meal for the king merely
tests the food and then offers it to the king who enjoys the taste of
it:

@quotation
@dots{}and the king, being lord, expert, and master, eats whatever he
likes, even so the mere testing of the food by the cook is like the
partial enjoyment of the object by the remaining dhammas (the citta
and the other cetasikas), and as the cook tests a portion of the food,
so the remaining dhammas enjoy a portion of the object, and as the
king, being lord, expert and master, eats the meal according to his
pleasure, so feeling, being lord, expert and master, enjoys the taste
of the object, and therefore it is said that enjoyment or experience
is its function. 

@end quotation

Thus, all feelings have in common that they experience the 'taste' of
an object. Citta and the other accompanying cetasikas also experience
the object, but feeling experiences it in its own characteristic way. 

Feelings are manifold and they can be classified in different ways.
When they are classified as @emph{three feelings}, they are:

@itemize

@item
pleasant feeling (sukha)

@item
unpleasant feeling (dukkha)

@item
indifferent (or neutral) feeling (adukkhamasukha: neither painful nor
pleasant)

@end itemize

There is no moment without feeling. When there is not pleasant feeling
or unpleasant feeling, there is indifferent feeling. It is difficult
to know what indifferent feeling is. So long as we cannot distinguish
nāma from rūpa we cannot know precisely the characteristic of feeling
and thus we cannot know indifferent feeling either. When mental
feelings and bodily feelings are taken into account, feelings can be
classified as @emph{fivefold:}

@itemize

@item
pleasant bodily feeling (sukha)

@item
painful bodily feeling (dukkha)

@item
happy feeling (somanassa)

@item
unhappy feeling (domanassa)

@item
indifferent feeling (upekkhā). 

@end itemize

@emph{Pleasant bodily feeling} and @emph{painful bodily feeling} are
nāmas. We can call them 'bodily feeling' because they are conditioned
by impact on the bodysense. When, for example, temperature which is
just the right amount of heat or cold impinges on the bodysense, the
body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa) which experiences it is accompanied
by pleasant bodily feeling. Body-consciousness is vipākacitta and in
this case kusala vipākacitta@footnote{The five sense-cognitions are
vipākacittas, results of kamma. When they experience a pleasant
object, they are the result of kusala kamma, a wholesome deed, and
when they experience an unpleasant object, they are the result of
akusala kamma, an unwholesome deed.}. The pleasant bodily feeling
which accompanies this kusala vipākacitta is also kusala vipāka.
Pleasant bodily feeling cannot accompany any other kind of citta but
the body-consciousness, kāya-viññāṇa, which is kusala vipāka. Thus we
see that not every kind of feeling can arise with all types of citta. 

Painful bodily feeling accompanies only the kāya-viññāṇa which is
akusala vipāka. When, for example, temperature which is too hot or too
cold impinges on the bodysense, kāya-viññāṇa which is akusala
vipākacitta experiences this unpleasant object. This akusala
vipākacitta is accompanied by painful bodily feeling. Painful bodily
feeling cannot accompany any other kind of citta but the kāya-viññāṇa
which is akusala vipāka. 

Bodily feelings arise because of impingement of a pleasant or
unpleasant object on the bodysense. The kāya-viññāṇa cognizes the
pleasant or unpleasant object which impinges on the bodysense, phassa
'contacts' the object and vedanā experiences the ``taste'' of the
object. The feeling which accompanies kāya-viññāṇa is either
@emph{pleasant feeling} or @emph{painful feeling}, it cannot be
indifferent feeling. In the case of the other
pañca-viññāṇas@footnote{The five pairs of sense-cognitions, seeing,
hearing, etc. One of each pair is kusala vipāka and one akusala
vipāka.} which are seeing, hearing, smelling and tasting, the
accompanying feeling is always indifferent feeling, no matter whether
the vipākacitta which experiences the object is kusala vipākacitta or
akusala vipākacitta.

The Paramattha Mañjūsā, a commentary to the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV,
note 56) explains why kāya-viññāṇa is accompanied by either pleasant
feeling or unpleasant feeling. This is because of the 'violence of the
impact's blow'; there is the direct impact of tangible object on the
bodysense. Tangible objects which are experienced through the rūpa
which is the bodysense are the following rūpas: solidity, appearing as
hardness or softness, temperature, appearing as heat or cold, and
motion, appearing as oscillation or pressure. By way of a simile the
difference is explained between the impact of tangible object on the
bodysense and the impact of the other sense objects on the relevant
senses. When a man places cottonwool on an anvil and strikes it with
an iron hammer, the hammer goes right through the cottonwool because
of the violence of the impact. In the case, however, of the other
pañca-viññāṇas, the impact is gentle, like the contact between two
pieces of cottonwool. Thus, they are accompanied by indifferent
feeling. The 'impact' of visible object on the eye-sense is gentle
when compared with the direct physical contact of tangible object with
the bodysense.

We may believe that bodily feeling can be indifferent, but this is not
so. The moment of body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa) is extremely
short; it is only one moment of vipāka and after it has fallen away
akusala cittas or kusala cittas arise. Body-consciousness is
accompanied either by pleasant bodily feeling or by painful bodily
feeling. The akusala cittas or kusala cittas which arise shortly
afterwards are accompanied by feelings which are different from bodily
feeling. They can be accompanied by happy feeling, unhappy feeling or
indifferent feeling. 

@emph{Somanassa,} happy feeling, can arise with cittas of all four
jātis, with kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. 

Somanassa is of the same jāti as the citta it accompanies. It does not
arise with every citta. Somanassa cannot accompany dosa-mūla-citta
which has aversion towards an object and it cannot accompany
moha-mūla-citta, citta rooted in ignorance. Somanassa can accompany
lobha-mūla-citta but it does not always accompany lobha-mūla-citta.
Lobha-mūla-citta can be accompanied by somanassa or by upekkhā,
indifferent feeling. When somanassa accompanies lobha-mūla-citta,
somanassa is also akusala. There can be pleasant feeling when one
likes a pleasant visible object, a beautiful sound, a fragrant odour,
a delicious taste, a soft touch or an agreeable thought. We would like
to have pleasant feeling all the time, it often seems to be the goal
of our life. However, pleasant feeling cannot last and when it is gone
we are sad. We find it very important what kind of feeling we have,
but feelings are beyond control, they arise because of conditions.
Lobha accompanied by somanassa is more intense than lobha accompanied
by upekkhā. 

Lobha-mūla-citta accompanied by somanassa arises when there are the
appropriate conditions; there is no self who can prevent this. If we
study the different types of feeling and the cittas they accompany it
will help us to recognize akusala cittas. If we would not know that
somanassa may accompany lobha-mūla-citta we would think that it is
good to have happy feeling. One may see the disadvantage of unhappy
feeling but does one recognize the disadvantage of all kinds of
akusala, also when they are accompanied by somanassa? Somanassa does
not stay. When we do not get the pleasant objects we are longing for
our attachment conditions aversion which is always accompanied by
unhappy feeling. If we realize the danger of all kinds of akusala, it
can remind us to be aware of the reality which appears. This is the
way leading to the eradication of akusala.

Somanassa can accompany kusala citta, but it does not accompany each
kusala citta. When we perform dāna (generosity), observe sīla
(morality) or apply ourselves to mental development, there can be
somanassa or upekkhā, indifferent feeling, with the kusala citta. We
would like to have kusala citta with somanassa, but for the arising of
somanassa there have to be the right conditions. One of these is
strong confidence in the benefit of kusala. Confidence (saddhā) is a
wholesome cetasika which accompanies each kusala citta, but there are
many degrees of confidence. When one has strong confidence in kusala,
one will perform it with joy. We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} (I,
Part II, Chapter I, 75) that:

@quotation
'abundance of confidence (saddhā), purity of views, seeing advantage
in kusala, should be understood as factors of this consciousness in
making it accompanied by joy'. 
@end quotation

When someone has right view of realities, right view of kusala and
akusala, of kamma and its result, he will be firmly convinced of the
benefit of kusala and this is a condition to perform it with
somanassa.

The pleasant feeling which accompanies kusala citta is quite different
from the pleasant feeling which accompanies lobha-mūla-citta. When we
give a present to someone else and there is pleasant feeling, we may
think that there is one kind of feeling which lasts, but in reality
there are different moments of feeling accompanying different cittas.
There can be a moment of pure generosity accompanied by pleasant
feeling, but there are bound to be many moments of attachment after
the kusala cittas have fallen away. We may be attached to the person
we give to or to the thing we give, or we may expect something in
return; we want to be liked by the person who receives our gift. Such
moments of attachment may be accompanied by somanassa. Somanassa which
is kusala and somanassa which accompanies lobha are different kinds of
somanassa arising closely one after the other, and it is difficult to
distinguish one from the other. It seems that there is one kind of
somanassa and that it lasts. Without right understanding we cannot
tell whether the somanassa which arises is kusala or akusala. Since
there are many more akusala cittas arising than kusala cittas, there
are many more moments of somanassa which are akusala than moments of
somanassa which are kusala. We cling to somanassa but we cannot choose
our own feelings. Who can control which feeling arises at a particular
moment? Feelings arise when there are the right conditions for their
arising, they are anattā, non-self. When a certain feeling appears it
can be known as only a kind of experience, no self in the feeling. 

Somanassa can accompany kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the sense-sphere,
rūpāvacara cittas (rūpa-jhānacittas) and lokuttara cittas. As regards
rūpa-jhānacittas, somanassa accompanies the cittas of four stages of
jhāna, it does not accompany the cittas of the fifth and highest stage
of jhāna. At this stage the citta is accompanied by upekkhā, which is
more refined and tranquil than somanassa. 

@emph{Domanassa}, unhappy feeling, arises only with cittas of the jāti
which is akusala; it always arises with dosa-mūla-citta, it does not
arise with lobha-mūla-citta or with moha-mūla-citta. It depends on
one's accumulations whether dosa-mūla-cittas arise or not. When an
unpleasant object such as a disagreeable flavour presents itself,
dosa-mūla-cittas are likely to arise. If there is, however, wise
attention to the unpleasant object, kusala citta arises instead of
akusala citta. 

Dosa-mūla-citta can arise only in the sensuous planes of existence,
it cannot arise in the higher planes of existence where those who
cultivate jhāna can be reborn. In the sensuous planes there is
clinging to the sense objects and this conditions dosa. When one does
not obtain pleasant sense objects dosa is likely to arise. Those who
have cultivated rūpa-jhāna and arūpa-jhāna@footnote{See Abhidhamma in
Daily Life, Chapter 22. In the development of samatha, tranquil
meditation, stages of rūpa-jhāna and arūpa-jhāna can be attained by
those who have accumulated the right conditions. Rūpa-jhāna,
fine-material jhāna, is still dependent on materiality, whereas
arūpa-jhāna, immaterial jhāna, is not dependant on materiality and
thus more tranquil.} have suppressed attachment to sense objects.
They can be reborn in higher planes of existence, in
rūpa-brahma-planes and in arūpa-brahma planes and in these planes
there are no conditions for dosa. However, when they are reborn in
sensuous planes where there are conditions for dosa, dosa-mūla-cittas
accompanied by domanassa arise again so long as they have not been
eradicated. We dislike domanassa and we would like to get rid of it,
but we should understand that dosa can only be eradicated by the
development of the wisdom which sees realities as they are. There is
no other way. Only the ariyan, the noble person, who has attained the
third stage of enlightenment which is the stage of the anāgāmī
(non-returner), has eradicated clinging to sense objects and thus he
has no more conditions for dosa. The anāgāmī and the arahat have
eradicated dosa and thus they never have any more unpleasant feeling. 

Dosa and domanassa always arise together. It is difficult to
distinguish between these two realities , but they are different
cetasikas. Domanassa is feeling, it experiences the taste of the
undesirable object. Dosa is not feeling, it has a different
characteristic. Dosa does not like the object which is experienced.
There are many degrees of dosa, it can be a slight aversion, anger or
hate. But in any case dosa does not want the object and domanassa
feels unhappy. We know so little about the different realities which
arise. We may have a backache. Is it painful bodily feeling which
appears, or is it the characteristic of domanassa which accompanies
dosa-mūla-citta? 

@emph{Upekkhā,} indifferent feeling, is different from somanassa and
from domanassa; it is neither happy nor unhappy. Upekkhā can arise
with cittas of all four jātis, but it does not arise with every citta.
When there is no awareness many moments of feeling pass unnoticed.
There is feeling with every citta and when we do not notice any
feeling there is still feeling: at such moments there is indifferent
feeling. We may not feel either glad or unhappy while we are busy
with our work or while we are thinking. Then there is indifferent
feeling. Indifferent feeling accompanies vipākacittas such as seeing
or hearing. It can accompany lobha-mūla-citta; this type of citta can
be accompanied either by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling.
Do we notice clinging which is accompanied by upekkhā? When we walk or
when we get hold of different things we use in our daily life, such as
a pen or a book, there is bound to be clinging even when we do not
feel particularly glad. We cling to life and we want to go on living
and receiving sense-impressions. We are attached to sense-impressions
such as seeing and hearing. There are many moments of seeing and
hearing and shortly after they have fallen away there are bound to be
lobha-mūla-cittas even when we do not have happy feeling. After seeing
has fallen away there is a mind-door process of cittas which
experience visible object through the mind-door and then there can be
other mind-door processes of cittas which think of concepts. We may
think of a person, a car or a tree. We @emph{like} to notice a person,
a car or a tree, these are concepts we are familiar with. We
@emph{like} to think and even when we do not feel glad there can be
clinging with indifferent feeling, but we do not notice this. It is
useful to know that lobha can be accompanied by upekkhā. Through the
Abhidhamma we can come to know our many defilements. It is better to
know realities than to mislead ourselves with regard to them. 

Upekkhā can accompany mahā-kusala cittas, kusala cittas of the
sense-sphere. We may help others, observe sīla or study Dhamma with
upekkhā. Feeling is a conditioned reality, we cannot force ourselves
to have pleasant feeling while we apply ourselves to kusala. Upekkhā
arises with kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the sense-sphere), rūpāvacara
cittas (rūpa-jhānacittas), arūpāvacara cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas) and
lokuttara cittas. As regards rūpa-jhānacittas, only the cittas of the
fifth and highest stage of rūpa-jhāna are accompanied by upekkhā. At
that stage there is a higher degree of calm than at the lower stages;
the upekkhā which accompanies that type of jhānacitta is very subtle.
All the arūpa-jhānacittas are accompanied by upekkhā. 

There are many different kinds of feeling and therefore we should not
imagine that it is easy to recognize feelings. When we study the
Abhidhamma we realize better what we do not know. It is difficult to
distinguish @emph{painful bodily feeling} from rūpa, or from
domanassa. When we have pain, we 'feel' that something is hurting and
we may think that it is easy to discern bodily painful feeling.
However, we may not be able to distinguish the painful feeling which
is nāma from the rūpa which is impinging on the body-sense. We are
usually thinking of the spot which is hurt and then we are thinking of
a concept. The thinking is a reality which can be known when it
appears, the concept is not a reality. It is important to know the
difference between ultimate realities and concepts. A precise
knowledge of the different nāmas and rūpas which arise each because of
their own conditions will help us to be less deluded about our life. 

When hardness impinges on the body-sense, the kāya-viññāṇa cognizes
the hardness and the accompanying feeling experiences the 'taste' of
the hardness. Time and again vipākacittas arise which experience
pleasant or unpleasant objects through the bodysense. There are
hardness or softness, heat or cold impinging on the bodysense, no
matter whether we are walking, standing, sitting or lying down. There
is the experience of hardness or softness time and again when we touch
things or take hold of them, but we are so absorbed in what we want to
get or want to do that we are unaware of the different experiences
through the senses. The feeling which is vipāka is different from
feeling which is associated with attachment or aversion. Pleasant
bodily feeling which is vipāka is not associated with attachment, and
painful bodily feeling is not associated with aversion. At the moment
of pleasant bodily feeling there is no attachment to the object;
pleasant bodily feeling merely experiences the pleasant object. At the
moment of painful bodily feeling there is no dislike of the object;
painful bodily feeling merely experiences the unpleasant object. After
the vipākacittas which experience pleasant or unpleasant objects have
fallen away, akusala cittas which are rooted in lobha (attachment),
dosa (aversion) or moha (ignorance) are bound to arise. Akusala cittas
arise very often, because we have accumulated many defilements. On the
other hand, when there are conditions for 'wise
attention'@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 9} to the
object, kusala cittas arise instead of akusala cittas. There may be,
for example, after the experience of tangible object, mindfulness of
nāma or rūpa.

We have considered the characteristics of pleasant bodily feeling,
painful bodily feeling, happy feeling (somanassa), unhappy feeling
(domanassa) and indifferent feeling (upekkhā)@footnote{For details
about the different feelings which accompany different cittas, see
Visuddhimagga XIV, 127-128, and my Appendix 1.} . Although all of them
are the cetasika which is feeling (vedanā), they are different kinds
of feeling with different characteristics. At every moment feeling is
different, because at every moment there is a different citta. For
example, upekkhā (indifferent feeling) which accompanies vipākacitta
is different from upekkhā which accompanies akusala citta or upekkhā
which accompanies kusala citta. Upekkhā which accompanies the
jhānacitta of the fifth stage is different again. All these feelings
are upekkhā, but they are conditioned by different cittas and
accompanying cetasikas. 

Since there is such a variety of feelings, it is useful to know more
classifications of feeling. Feelings can be classified by way of
contact through the six doors of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
body-sense and mind. Cittas experience objects through six doors and
through these doors pleasant and unpleasant objects are experienced.
On account of a pleasant object there is often lobha-mūla-citta which
can be accompanied by somanassa or upekkhā, and on account of an
unpleasant object there is often dosa-mūla-citta which is accompanied
by domanassa. If we understand that the experience of pleasant and
unpleasant objects and the different feelings which arise on account
of them are conditioned we will attach less importance to the kind of
feeling which arises at a particular moment. 

The experience of pleasant or unpleasant objects through the senses is
vipāka conditioned by kamma, and the kusala cittas or akusala cittas
arising on account of the objects which are experienced are
conditioned by our accumulated tendencies. There is no self who can
exercise power over any reality which arises, there are only nāma and
rūpa which arise because of conditions. Sometimes there are conditions
for indifferent feeling, sometimes for pleasant feeling, sometimes for
unpleasant feeling@footnote{Feelings can be classified in several more
ways. See Kindred Sayings IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings
about Feeling, par 22, where feelings are classified as hundred and
eight.}.

Cittas arise and fall away very rapidly, succeeding one another; there
never is a moment without citta and never a moment without feeling. We
cling to happy feeling, somanassa, but we know so little about
ourselves and thus we may not recognize the different kinds of happy
feeling. When we are laughing there is happy feeling with
lobha-mūla-citta, but we may not realize that there is happy feeling
which is akusala. We should not try to suppress laughing, but it is
useful to know the different types of realities which arise. When we
see someone else there can be happy feeling arising with attachment or
happy feeling arising with kusala citta. The cittas which think of the
person we meet are akusala cittas when there is no dāna (generosity),
sīla (good moral conduct), or bhāvanā (mental development).

Feeling is @emph{saṅkhāra dhamma}, a conditioned dhamma. Feeling is
conditioned by the citta and the other cetasikas it accompanies.
Feeling which arises, falls away immediately, it does not stay.
Feeling is a @emph{khandha}, it is one among the five khandhas,
namely, vedanākkhandha@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter
2. Conditioned realities can be classified as five aggregates or
khandhas: the khandha of rūpas, of feelings, of perceptions (saññā),
of ``formations'' or ``activities'' (all cetasikas other than feeling
and saññā) and of consciousness.}. We cling to feeling and we take it
for self. If our knowledge of feeling is merely theoretical we will
not know feeling as it is. When there is awareness of feeling when it
appears it can be known as only a type of nāma and not self. 

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Through how many doors can pleasant mental
feeling experience an object? 

@item
There is a great variety of
feelings, but all feelings have something in common. What is the
characteristic they have in common? 

@item
Feeling accompanies every
citta. Can any kind of feeling accompany all cittas? 

@item
Can everybody know the reality of pleasant feeling or of unpleasant
feeling? 

@item
Why is body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa) never
accompanied by indifferent feeling? 

@item
Which jāti is painful
bodily feeling? 

@item
Which jāti is unhappy feeling (domanassa)?

@item
When an unpleasant tangible object impinges on the body-sense,
can kusala cittas accompanied by somanassa arise which cognize that
unpleasant object? 

@end enumerate

@node Perception
@chapter Perception

@section Perception (saññā)

Saññā, which can be translated as perception, recognition or
remembrance, is another cetasika among the seven 'universals' which
accompany every citta. Saññā accompanies every citta, there is no
moment without saññā. Saññā experiences the same object as the citta
it accompanies but it performs its own task: it 'perceives' or
'recognizes' the object and it 'marks' it so that it can be recognized
again. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter 1, 110) states about
saññā:

@quotation
@dots{}It has the characteristic of noting@footnote{In Pāli:
sañjānāti, cognizing well.} and the function of recognizing what has
been previously noted. There is no such thing as perception in the
four planes of existence without the characteristic of noting. All
perceptions have the characteristic of noting. Of them, that
perceiving which knows by specialized knowledge has the function of
recognizing what has been noted previously. We may see this procedure
when the carpenter recognizes a piece of wood which he has marked by
specialized knowledge@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} then gives a second definition:

@quotation

Perception has the characteristic of perceiving by an act of general
inclusion, and the function of making marks as a condition for
repeated perception (for recognizing or remembering)@footnote{I am
using the translation of the Ven. Nyanaponika, Abhidhamma Studies,
page 69, BPS, Kandy, 1976}, as when woodcutters 'perceive' logs and so
forth. Its manifestation is the action of interpreting by means of the
sign as apprehended, as in the case of blind persons who 'see' an
elephant@footnote{Here I use the English translation of the
Visuddhimagga, XIV, 130, instead of the English text of the
Atthasālinī. The commentary refers to a story in the ``Udāna'' (Verses
of Uplift, Minor Anthologies, 68-69) about blind people who touch
different parts of an elephant. Each of them interprets in his own way
what an elephant is like: the person who touches the head believes
that the elephant is like a pot, since he remembers what a pot is
like; the person who touches the tusks believes that it is like a
ploughshare, and so on. Thus, there is recognizing of a sign or label
which was made before.}. Or, it has briefness as manifestation, like
lightning, owing to its inability to penetrate the object. Its
proximate cause is whatever object has appeared, like the perception
which arises in young deer mistaking scarecrows for men. 

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 130) gives a similar definition. We can
use the words perceiving, noting, recognizing and 'marking' in order
to designate the reality which is saññā, but words are inadequate to
describe realities. We should study the characteristic and function of
saññā. 

Saññā is not the same as citta which is the 'leader' in cognizing an
object. As we have seen, saññā recognizes the object and it 'marks' it
so that it can be recognized again. This is explained by way of a
simile: carpenters put tags or signs on logs so that they can
recognize them at once by means of these marks. This simile can help
us to understand the complex process of recognizing or remembering.
What we in conventional language call ``remembering'' consists of many
different moments of citta and each of these moments of citta is
accompanied by saññā which connects past experiences with the present
one and conditions again recognition in the future. This connecting
function is represented by the words 'recognition' and
'marking'@footnote{See Abhidhamma Studies, by the Ven. Nyanaponika,
1976, page 70, where it is explained that the making of marks and
remembering is included in every act of perception.}. When the present
experience has fallen away it has become past and what was future
becomes the present, and all the time there is saññā which performs
its function so that an object can be recognized. If we remember that
saññā accompanies @emph{every} citta, we will better understand that
the characteristic of saññā is not exactly the same as what we mean by
the conventional terms of 'recognition', 'perception' or 'marking'.
Each citta which arises falls away immediately and is succeeded by the
next citta, and since each citta is accompanied by saññā which
recognizes and 'marks' the object, one can recognize or remember what
was perceived or learnt before. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} mentions as a manifestation of saññā: 

@quotation

'briefness, like lightning, owing to its inability to penetrate the
object'. 

@end quotation

Saññā merely recognizes and 'marks' the object. Saññā is different
from citta which is the 'chief' in knowing an object and different
from paññā which can know the true nature of realities@footnote{The
Visuddhimagga (XIV, 3-5) explains the difference between saññā, citta
and paññā by way of a simile. Saññā is like the mere perception of a
coin by a child who does not know its value. Citta is like the
villager who knows its value. Paññā is like the money-changer who
penetrates its true characteristics.} . 

The proximate cause of saññā is an object, in whatever way that
appears. The object can be a paramattha dhamma, i.e. nāma or rūpa, or
a concept (paññatti). Whatever object citta cognizes, saññā recognizes
and marks it. 

Saññā performs its function through each of the six doors. There is
saññā at this moment. When there is seeing there is saññā and it
recognizes and marks visible object. When there is hearing there is
saññā which recognizes and marks sound. There is saññā when there is
smelling, tasting, touching or when there is the experience of objects
through the mind-door. Cittas experience objects through the six doors
and the saññā which accompanies citta experiences the object through
the same doorway and performs its function accordingly. When we
recognize someone's voice, this is actually the result of different
processes of cittas which experience objects through the sense-door
and through the mind-door. At each moment there is saññā which
performs its function. There are moments of hearing of what appears
through the ears, of sound, and when we think of someone's voice there
are cittas which experience concepts. The hearing conditions the
thinking, we could not think of a voice if there were not hearing. It
is the same when we think we 'see' a person. There is thinking of a
concept, but this thinking is conditioned by the seeing of visible
object. The recognition of a person is the result of many different
processes of citta and each moment of citta is accompanied by saññā.
There is seeing which experiences visible object and after the
eye-door process has been completed visible object is experienced
through the mind-door. There are other mind-door processes of cittas
which experience concepts. 

Saññā accompanies every citta and also when citta experiences a
concept saññā marks and remembers that object. When we are engaged in
the activities of our daily life, do we notice that there is
recognition or remembrance? We remember how to use different objects,
how to eat with fork, knife and spoon, how to turn on the water tap,
how to write or how to find our way when we walk in our house or on
the street. We take it for granted that we remember all these things.
We should know that it is saññā which remembers. When we are reading
it is due to saññā that we recognize the letters and know their
meaning. However, we should not forget that when we are reading there
are also moments of seeing and at such moments saññā performs its
function as well. It seems that we see and recognize what we see all
at the same time, but this is not so. When we recognize letters and
words and remember their meaning, this is not due to one moment of
saññā but to many moments of saññā accompanying the cittas which
succeed one another in the different processes. The study of saññā can
remind us that cittas arise and fall away extremely rapidly. 

Countless moments of saññā succeed one another and perform their
function so that we can remember successive events such as sentences
we hear when someone is speaking. There are moments of hearing and the
saññā which accompanies hearing-consciousness merely perceives the
sound, it does not know the meaning of what is said. When we
understand the meaning of what has been said there are cittas which
experience concepts and the saññā which accompanies those cittas
remembers and 'marks' a concept. Because of many moments of saññā we
can follow the trend of thought of a speaker or we ourselves can
reason about something, connect parts of an argument and draw
conclusions. All this is not due to 'our memory' but to saññā which is
not self but only a kind of nāma. What we take for 'our memory' or
'our recognition' is not one moment which stays, but many different
moments of saññā which arise and fall away. Because of saññā past
experiences and also concepts and names are remembered, people and
things are recognized. 

Also when we do not remember something or we mistake something for
something else, there is saññā which accompanies the cittas at such
moments. If we have forgotten something, we did not think of the
object we wanted to think of but at that moment we were thinking of
another object and this was remembered and marked by saññā. For
example, if we go to the market and forget to buy lettuce because we
suddenly notice tomatoes and our attention turns to the tomatoes, we
say that we have forgotten to buy lettuce. In reality there are
moments of saññā all the time since it accompanies each citta, and
saññā performs its function all the time. It depends on conditions
what object is remembered at a particular moment, it does not always
turn out the way 'we' want it. Also when we in vain try to remember a
name, there is still saññā, but it remembers and 'marks' an object
which is different from the concept we think we should remember. We
may have aversion because of our forgetfulness and also then there is
citta accompanied by saññā which performs its function. 

Saññā accompanies cittas which arise in a process and it also
accompanies cittas which do not arise in a process, namely the
paṭisandhi-citta (rebirth-consciousness), the bhavanga-citta
(life-continuum) and the cuti-citta (dying-consciousness). When we are
sound asleep and not dreaming there are bhavanga-cittas and also in
between the different processes of cittas there are bhavanga-cittas.
The object of the paṭisandhi-citta, the bhavanga-citta and the
cuti-citta is the same as the object experienced by the javana-cittas
which arose shortly before the cuti-citta of the previous
life@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 15}. 'We', or rather
the cittas which are thinking at this moment, do not know what that
object is. However every time the bhavanga-citta arises in between the
processes of cittas it experiences that object and the saññā which
accompanies the bhavanga-citta remembers that object. 

Saññā never arises alone, it has to accompany citta and other
cetasikas and it is conditioned by them. Saññā is @emph{saṅkhāra
dhamma,} conditioned dhamma. Saññā arises with the citta and then
falls away with the citta. Saññā is a @emph{khandha}, it is one among
the five khandhas. We cling to saññā, we take it for self. 

Saññā arises with all cittas of the four jātis. Saññā is of the same
jāti as the citta it accompanies and thus saññā can be akusala,
kusala, vipāka or kiriya. 

Saññā can be classified according to the six kinds of objects which
are experienced through the six doors and this reminds us that saññā
is different all the time. We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book
of the Sixes, Chapter VI, par9, A Penetrative Discourse):

@quotation
``Monks, perceptions are six: perceptions of visible objects, sounds,
smells, tastes, touches and ideas.''
@end quotation

The perception of visible object is not the perception of sound and it
is not the perception of a concept. When we for example talk to
someone else there is saññā which perceives sound, there is saññā
which perceives visible object, there is saññā which perceives
tangible object, there is saññā which perceives a concept. All these
saññās are completely different from one another and they arise at
different moments. Objects appear one at a time through the different
doorways and different saññās mark and remember these objects. When we
understand this it will help us to see that our life actually is one
moment of citta which experiences one object through one of the six
doors. The ultimate truth is different from conventional truth,
namely, the world of people and things which seem to last. 

Saññā which arises with akusala citta is also akusala. Saññā may
arise together with wrong view. When one takes for permanent what is
impermanent the citta with wrong view is also accompanied by saññā
which remembers the object in a distorted way. It is the same when one
takes for self what is not self. We read in the @emph{Gradual
Sayings,} Book of the Fours, Chapter V, par9, Perversions) about four
perversions (vipallāsas) of saññā, citta and diṭṭhi: 

@quotation

Monks, there are these four perversions of perception (saññā), four
perversions of thought (citta), four perversions of view (diṭṭhi).
What four?

To hold that in the impermanent there is permanence, is a perversion
of perception, thought and view. To hold that in dukkha there is
not-dukkha, is a perversion of perception, thought and view. To hold
that in the not-self there is self, is a perversion of perception,
thought and view. To hold that in the foul there is the fair, is a
perversion of perception, thought and view. These are the four
perversions of perception, thought and view@dots{}

@end quotation

So long as we have not attained to the stage of paññā which knows the
impermanence of nāma and rūpa, we may still think that people and
things can stay, be it for a long or a short time. Nāma and rūpa are
impermanent and thus they are dukkha, they cannot be true happiness.
We still take what is dukkha for happiness and we still cling to the
concept of self. We also take the foul for the fair. The body is foul,
it is not beautiful. However, we cling to our body and take it for
something beautiful. So long as one has not attained the first stage
of enlightenment, there are still the perversions of saññā, citta and
diṭṭhi. The sotāpanna, who has attained the first stage of
enlightenment, has eradicated diṭṭhi, wrong view, and thus he has no
more perversions which are connected with diṭṭhi. But he has not
eradicated all perversions since they are eradicated in different
stages. The sotāpanna still clings to objects and therefore he can
still have the perversions of citta and saññā while he takes for
happiness what is not happiness and takes for beautiful what is foul. 

When we think of a concept such as a flower, we may take the flower
for something which lasts. The ariyans, those who have attained
enlightenment, also think of concepts but they do so without wrong
view. When they recognize a flower, they do not take that moment of
recognizing for self. Neither do they take the flower for something
which lasts. 

So long as defilements have not been eradicated we are subject to
rebirth, we have to experience objects through the senses and on
account of these objects clinging arises. We tend to become obsessed
by the objects we experience. We read in the @emph{Middle Length
Sayings} (I, no. l8, Discourse of the Honey Ball) about the origin of
perceptions and obsessions and their ending. Mahā-Kaccana gave to the
monks an explanation about what the Buddha had said in brief:

@quotation
@dots{}Visual consciousness, your reverences, arises because of eye
and visual object; the meeting of the three is sensory impingement
(phassa); feelings are because of sensory impingement; what one feels
one perceives; what one perceives one reasons about; what one reasons
about obsesses one; what obsesses one is the origin of the number of
perceptions and obsessions which assail a man in regard to visual
object cognisable by the eye, past, future, present@enddots{} 

@end quotation

The same is said with regard to the other doorways. Is this not daily
life? We are obsessed by all the objects which are experienced through
the six doors, objects of the past, the present and the future. It is
due to saññā that we remember what we saw, heard, smelled, tasted,
touched and experienced through the mind-door. We attach so much
importance to our recollections, we often are dreaming about them.
However, also such moments can be object of awareness and thus the
thinking can be known as only a kind of nāma which arises because of
conditions, not self. When realities are known as they appear one at a
time through the six doorways, one is on the way leading to the end of
obsessions. When all defilements have been eradicated there will be no
more conditions for rebirth, no more conditions for being obsessed by
objects. 

Saññā is conditioned by the citta and the other cetasikas it
accompanies and thus saññā is different as it accompanies different
types of citta. When we listen to the Dhamma and we remember the
Dhamma we have heard there is kusala saññā with the kusala citta.
Remembering what one has heard and reflecting about it again and again
are important conditions for the arising of sati which is mindful of
what appears now. The saññā which accompanies mindfulness of the
present moment is different from the saññā accompanying the citta
which thinks of realities. Saññā does not only arise with kāmāvacara
cittas ( cittas of the sense-sphere), it arises also with cittas of
other planes of consciousness. When one develops samatha saññā
recognizes and 'marks' the meditation subject of samatha. When calm is
more developed, one may acquire a 'mental image'
(nimitta@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life Chapter 21.}) of the
meditation subject. The saññā which remembers a 'mental image' of a
meditation subject is different from the saññā which arises all the
time in daily life and perceives sense-objects. When one attains
jhāna, saññā accompanies the jhānacitta and then saññā is not of the
sensuous plane of consciousness. When saññā accompanies rūpāvacara
citta (rūpa-jhānacitta) saññā is also rūpāvacara and when saññā
accompanies arūpāvacara citta (arūpa-jhānacitta) saññā is also
arūpāvacara. The saññā which is arūpāvacara is more refined than the
saññā which is rūpāvacara. 

The fourth stage of arūpa-jhāna is the 'Sphere of neither perception
nor non-perception' (n'eva-saññā-n'āsaññāyatana)@footnote{Abhidhamma
in Daily Life Chapter 22}. The saññā which accompanies the arūpāvacara
citta of the fourth stage of jhāna is extremely subtle. We read in the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (X, 50):

@quotation
@dots{}the perception here is neither perception, since it is
incapable of performing the decisive function of perception, nor yet
non-perception, since it is present in a subtle state as a residual
formation, thus it is 'neither perception nor non-perception@dots{}
'@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life Chapter 22}

@end quotation

Saññā accompanies lokuttara citta which experiences nibbāna and then
saññā is also lokuttara. Nibbāna cannot be attained unless conditioned
realities are known as they are: as impermanent, dukkha and anattā. We
read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Tens, Chapter VI,
par6, Ideas) about ten kinds of saññā which are of great fruit and are
leading to the 'deathless' , which is nibbāna. The Pāli term saññā is
here translated as 'idea'. We read about the ten 'ideas' which should
be developed:

@quotation

Monks, these ten ideas, if made to grow and made much of, are of great
fruit, of great profit for plunging into the deathless, for ending up
in the deathless. What ten ideas?

The idea of the foul, of death, of repulsiveness in food, of distaste
for all the world, the idea of impermanence, of dukkha in
impermanence, of not-self in dukkha, the idea of abandoning, of
fading, of ending. 

These ten ideas, monks, if made to grow@dots{}are of great profit
for plunging into the deathless, for ending up in the deathless.

@end quotation

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Saññā accompanies each citta, but it falls
away completely with the citta. How can we still remember things which
happened in the past? 

@item
When we see a house, through which
doorway does saññā perform its function? 

@item
When we mistake
something for something else, how can there still be saññā at such a
moment? 

@item
When we recognize a house, can there be perversion of
saññā? 

@item
Can the sotāpanna think of concepts and recognize people
and things? 

@item
Give examples of akusala saññā. 

@item
How can one
develop 'perception of impermanence' (anicca saññā)? 

@end enumerate

@node Volition
@chapter Volition

@section Volition (cetanā)

Cetanā, volition, is another cetasika among the 'universals', the
seven cetasikas which accompany every citta. Cetanā is often
translated as 'volition', but we should not be misled by the
conventional term which designates the reality of cetanā. Cetanā
accompanies, together with phassa (contact), vedanā (feeling), saññā
(remembrance) and the other 'universals', all cittas of the four
jātis. Thus, cetanā accompanies kusala citta, akusala citta,
vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. When we intend to steal or when we make
the resolution not to kill, it is evident that there is cetanā.
However, also when we are seeing or hearing, and even when we are
asleep, there is cetanā since it accompanies every citta. There is no
citta without cetanā. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 111) states about
cetanā that its characteristic is coordinating the associated dhammas
(citta and the other cetasikas) on the object and that its function is
'willing'. We read:

@quotation
@dots{}There is no such thing as volition in the four planes of
existence without the characteristic of coordinating; all volition has
it. But the function of 'willing' is only in moral (kusala) and
immoral (akusala) states@dots{}It has directing as manifestation. It
arises directing associated states, like the chief disciple, the chief
carpenter, etc. who fulfil their own and others' duties. 

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 135) gives a similar
definition@footnote{See also the Dhammasangaṇi par5}. The
characteristic of cetanā is coordinating. It coordinates the citta and
the other cetasikas it accompanies on the object. Citta cognizes the
object, it is the leader in knowing the object. The cetasikas which
accompany citta share the same object, but they each have to fulfil
their own task. For example, phassa contacts the object, vedanā feels,
experiences the ``taste'' of the object, and saññā ``marks'' and
remembers the object. Cetanā sees to it that the other dhammas it
arises together with fulfil their tasks with regard to the object they
all share. Every cetanā which arises, no matter whether it accompanies
kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta or kiriyacitta, has to
coordinate the tasks of the other dhammas it accompanies.

The cetanā which accompanies kusala citta and akusala citta has, in
addition to coordinating, another task to perform: 'willing' or
'activity of kamma'@footnote{āyūhana which means 'striving' or
pursuing, is translated in the English text of the Atthasālinī as
conation, and in the English text of the Visuddhimagga as
accumulation.}. According to the @emph{Atthasālinī}, as to activity in
moral and immoral acts, cetanā is exceedingly energetic whereas the
accompanying cetasikas play only a restricted part. Cetanā which
accompanies kusala citta and akusala citta coordinates the work of the
other cetasikas it arises together with and it 'wills' kusala or
akusala, thus, it makes a ``double effort''. The @emph{Atthasālinī}
compares the double task of cetanā to the task of a landowner who
directs the work of his labourers, looks after them and also takes
himself an equal share of the work. He doubles his strength and
doubles his effort. Even so volition doubles its strength and its
effort in moral and immoral acts.

As regards the manifestation of cetanā which is directing, the
@emph{Atthasālinī} compares cetanā with the chief disciple who recites
his own lessons and makes the other pupils recite their lessons as
well, with the chief carpenter who does his own work and makes the
other carpenters do their work, or with the general who fights himself
and makes the other soldiers take part in the battle, ``@dots{}for
when he begins, the others follow his example. Even so, when volition
starts work on its object, it sets associated states to do each its
own.``

The cetanā which accompanies vipākacitta and kiriyacitta merely
coordinates the tasks of the other dhammas it accompanies, it does not
'will' kusala or akusala and it does not motivate wholesome or
unwholesome deeds. For example, seeing-consciousness, which is
vipākacitta, the result of kamma, is accompanied by cetanā and this
cetanā is also vipāka. The cetanā which accompanies
seeing-consciousness directs the tasks which the accompanying dhammas
have to fulfil with regard to visible object. It directs, for example,
phassa which contacts visible object, vedanā which feels and saññā
which marks and remembers visible object.

Cetanā which accompanies kusala citta or akusala citta has a double
task, it is 'exceedingly energetic'. Apart from coordinating the
other dhammas, it 'wills' kusala or akusala and when it has the
intensity to motivate a deed through body, speech or mind, it is
capable of producing the result of that deed later on. When we speak
about kusala kamma or akusala kamma we usually think of @emph{courses
of action} (kamma pathas) which can be performed through body, speech
or mind. However, we should remember that when we perform wholesome or
unwholesome deeds it is actually the wholesome or unwholesome
@emph{volition or intention} which motivates the deed and this is the
activity of kamma which is accumulated and can produce its appropriate
result later on. Thus, @emph{akusala kamma and kusala kamma are
actually akusala cetanā and kusala cetanā.}

Akusala cetanā and kusala cetanā can have many intensities, they can
be coarse or more subtle. When they are more subtle they do not
motivate kamma pathas, courses of action, through body, speech or
mind. For example, when we like our food there is lobha-mūla-citta
and it is accompanied by akusala cetanā. Although the lobha-mūla-citta
does not motivate an unwholesome course of action, it is not kusala
but akusala; it is different from kusala citta with generosity, from
kusala citta which observes sīla or from kusala citta which applies
itself to mental development. Whenever we do not apply ourselves to
dāna, sīla or bhāvanā, we act, speak or think with akusala cittas.
Thus, there is likely to be akusala citta very often in a day, since
the moments we apply ourselves to kusala are very rare. There is
likely to be akusala citta when we take hold of objects, eat, drink or
talk. When we laugh there is lobha-mūla citta. We may not realize
that there is akusala citta when the degree of akusala does not have
the intensity of harming others, but in fact there are countless
moments of akusala citta.

When we are lying or slandering the degree of akusala is more coarse
and at such moments akusala cetanā motivates akusala kamma patha
(course of action) through speech. The akusala cetanā directs the
other dhammas it accompanies so that they perform their own tasks and
it 'wills' akusala. Moreover, it is able to produce the appropriate
result of the bad deed later on, since the unwholesome volition or
kamma is accumulated. Each citta which arises falls away but it
conditions the succeeding citta. Since our life is an uninterrupted
series of cittas which succeed one another, unwholesome and wholesome
volitions or kammas are accumulated from moment to moment and can
therefore produce results later on. 

There are ten kinds of akusala kamma patha, courses of action, which
are performed through body, speech or mind@footnote{Abhidhamma in
Daily Life Chapter 5}. They are: killing, stealing, sexual
misbehaviour, lying, slandering, rude speech, frivolous talk,
covetousness, ill-will and wrong view. The akusala cetanā (or akusala
kamma) which motivates such a deed is capable of producing akusala
vipāka in the form of rebirth in an unhappy plane of existence or it
can produce akusala vipāka which arises in the course of one's life,
vipākacittas which experience unpleasant objects through the senses. 

Kamma patha can be of different degrees and thus its result is of
different degrees. Kamma patha is not always a 'completed action'.
There are certain constituent factors which make kamma patha a
completed action and for each of the kamma pathas these factors are
different. For example, in the case of killing there have to be: a
living being, consciousness that there is a living being, intention of
killing, the effort of killing and consequent death
(@emph{Atthasālinī}, I, Part III, Chapter V, 97). When a large animal
is killed the degree of akusala kamma is higher than when a small
animal is killed. The killing of a human being is akusala kamma which
is of a higher degree than the killing of an animal.

In the case of slandering, there are four factors which make it a
completed action: other persons to be divided; the purpose: 'they will
be separated', or the desire to endear oneself to another; the
corresponding effort; the communication (@emph{Atthasālinī}, same
section, 100 ). We read: 

@quotation

``But when there is no rupture among others, the offence does not
amount to a complete course; it does so only when there is a
rupture.''

@end quotation

Akusala kamma patha which is a ``completed action'' is capable of
producing an unhappy rebirth. Some akusala kammas which are very
powerful such as killing a parent produce an unhappy rebirth in the
immediately following life. Some akusala kammas produce results in
this life, some in following lives. There are many intensities of
akusala kamma and they produce their results accordingly.

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Eights, Chapter IV,
par10, Very trifling) about different results which are produced by
akusala kammas. The 'very trifling result' which is mentioned in the
sutta is the unpleasant result which arises in the course of one's
life. We read:

@quotation

Monks, taking life, when pursued, practised, increased, brings one to
hell, to an animal's womb, to the Peta realm@footnote{Peta is
translated as 'ghost'. It is a being of an unhappy plane.}; what is
the very trifling result of taking life is the shortening of a man's
life.

Monks, stealing, when pursued@dots{}, brings one to hell@dots{}; the
very trifling result is a man's loss of wealth.

Monks, fleshly lusts when pursued@dots{}, bring one to hell@dots{};
the very trifling result is a man's rivalry and hatred.

Monks, lying when pursued@dots{}, brings one to hell@dots{}; the
very trifling result is the slandering and false-speaking for a man. 

Monks, backbiting, when pursued@dots{}, brings one to hell@dots{};
the very trifling result is the breaking up of a man's friendships.

Monks, harsh speech, when pursued@dots{}, brings one to hell@dots{};
the very trifling result is an unpleasant noise for a man.

Monks, frivolous talk, when pursued@dots{}, brings one to hell@dots{}
; the very trifling result is unacceptable speech for a man.

Monks, drinking strong drink, when pursued, practised, increased,
brings one to hell, to an animal's womb, to the Peta realm; what is
the very trifling result of drinking strong drink is madness for a
man.

@end quotation

When kusala kamma patha is performed, kusala cetanā ``wills'' kusala,
and it also coordinates the tasks of the other dhammas it accompanies.
Kusala cetanā is capable of producing its appropriate result later on
in the form of rebirth in a happy plane or it can produce its result
in the course of life in the form of pleasant experiences through the
senses.

Kusala kamma can be classified as dāna (generosity), sīla (morality or
virtue) and bhāvanā (mental development). Dāna comprises, apart from
giving gifts, many other forms of kusala. Included in dāna are, for
example, appreciating the kusala cittas of others and 'sharing one's
merits'. As to the sharing of one's merits, when someone has done a
wholesome deed and he gives others the opportunity to rejoice in the
kusala he has performed, it is a way of dāna; at such a moment he
helps others to have kusala cittas as well. The observance of the
precepts which is sīla, can also be considered as a way of dāna. We
read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings}, (Book of the Eights, Chapter IV,
par9, Outcomes of Merit) that going for refuge to the Buddha, the
Dhamma and the Sangha leads to happy results and that there are
further five gifts which lead to happy results. These are the
following@footnote{Translated by Ven. Nyanaponika, in Anguttara
Nikāya, An Anthology III, Wheel publication 238-240, BPS. Kandy, 1976.
}:
@quotation

Herein, monks, a noble disciple gives up the taking of life and
abstains from it. By abstaining from the taking of life, the noble
disciple gives to immeasurable beings freedom from fear, gives to them
freedom from hostility, and freedom from oppression. By giving to
immeasurable beings freedom from fear, hostility and oppression, he
himself will enjoy immeasurable freedom from fear, hostility and
oppression@dots{}

Further, monks, a noble disciple gives up the taking of what is not
given@dots{}
@dots{}gives up sexual misconduct@enddots{} 
@dots{}gives up wrong speech@enddots{} 
@dots{}gives up intoxicating drinks and drugs causing heedlessness,
and abstains from them. By abstaining from intoxicating drinks and
drugs, the noble disciple gives to immeasurable beings freedom from
fear, freedom from hostility and freedom from oppression. By giving to
immeasurable beings freedom from fear, hostility and oppression, he
himself will enjoy immeasurable freedom from fear, freedom from
hostility and freedom from oppression@dots{}

@end quotation

When we abstain from ill deeds we give others the opportunity to live
in safety and without fear.

Sīla is abstaining from ill deeds which are committed through body or
speech, but apart from abstaining from ill deeds there are many other
aspects of sīla@footnote{The Visuddhimagga I, 17 and following,
describes many aspects of sīla.}. When one abstains from killing it is
kusala sīla. But also when there is no opportunity for killing there
can be kusala sīla: someone can make the resolution to spare the lives
of all living beings, even of the smallest insects he can hardly see.
Even so, someone can make the resolution to abstain from other kinds
of akusala kamma, even when the opportunity to commit them has not
arisen. For example, when a person has found out that intoxicating
drinks have a bad effect, kusala cetanā may take the resolution to
refrain in the future from intoxicating drinks. The wholesome
intention at such a moment can be a condition for abstaining later on
when there is an opportunity for drinking. However, kusala citta is
not self, it arises when there are conditions for it. A moment later
akusala citta may arise and our good intentions are forgotten. We may
be annoyed that we do not live up to our good intentions, but we
should remember that kusala citta and akusala citta arise because of
their own conditions. Akusala citta arises because of conditions which
are entirely different from the conditions for the kusala citta which
made the resolution to observe sīla. We all have accumulated
tendencies to kusala and to akusala and it depends on conditions
whether we perform kusala kamma or akusala kamma. When there is no
development of mahā-satipaṭṭhāna it is very difficult to observe the
precepts.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} mentions in the section on sīla (Chapter I,
53-60) the ``guarding of the sense-doors'', because this can be
considered as an aspect of sīla. When there is mindfulness of, for
example, visible object and visible object is not taken for a 'thing'
or a person but is known as only a kind of rūpa appearing through the
eyes, the eye-door is guarded. At that moment there is no attachment
to visible object, no aversion towards it, no ignorance about it.
Later on we may become absorbed in what we see and we may cling to it,
but at the moment of mindfulness the doorways are guarded and there is
restraint of the senses. Thus, mindfulness of nāma and rūpa, which is
a form of bhāvanā (mental development), can also be considered as
sīla.

Kusala kamma which is @emph{bhāvanā} comprises studying and teaching
Dhamma, samatha, tranquil meditation, and vipassanā, the development
of right understanding of realities. The development of right
understanding is the highest form of kusala kamma because it leads to
the eradication of ignorance. When ignorance has been eradicated there
are no more conditions for rebirth in a next life, one is freed from
the cycle of birth and death.

We have accumulated different degrees of kusala kamma and akusala
kamma and they are capable of producing their appropriate results when
there is opportunity for it. We may be inclined to think that the term
``accumulation'' only pertains to kamma, but not only kamma is
accumulated, also tendencies to kusala and akusala are accumulated.
When one steals, akusala kamma is accumulated which is capable of
producing vipāka later on. However vipāka is not the only effect of
this unwholesome deed. Also the tendency to stealing is accumulated
and thus there are conditions that one steals again. We have the
potential in us for all kinds of bad deeds and when there is an
opportunity akusala cetanā can motivate a bad deed through body,
speech and mind. 

We should distinguish the condition for vipākacitta from the condition
for kusala citta or for akusala citta. Accumulated kamma which
produces vipāka is one type of condition. The accumulated tendencies
to good and evil due to which kusala citta and akusala citta arise are
another type of condition. Thus, there are different types of
condition which play their part in our life. 

Tendencies to all kinds of defilements are accumulated. When, for
example, lobha-mūla-citta arises, the tendency to lobha is accumulated
and thus there are conditions for the arising again of
lobha-mūla-citta. We are bound to be attached because we have
accumulated such an amount of lobha. Not only unwholesome tendencies,
but also wholesome tendencies can be accumulated. When there is a
moment of right mindfulness of the reality which appears now, it is a
condition for the arising of mindfulness again, later on. We tend to
be attached rather than to be mindful, but when mindfulness has been
accumulated more it will be less difficult to be mindful. Whatever
tendency is accumulated now will bear on our life in the
future@footnote{See also Abhidhamma Studies V, 3, by Ven. Nyanaponika,
B.P.S. Kandy 1976.}.

In the @emph{Jātakas} (Birth Stories, Khuddaka Nikāya) we find many
examples of people who committed the same deeds again and again in
successive lives. For example, Devadatta who tried to kill the Buddha
had tried to kill him before, in many former lives when the Buddha was
still a Bodhisatta. We read in the 'Dhammaddhaja Jātaka' (220) that
the Buddha said: 

@quotation

``This is not the first time Devadatta has tried to murder me and has
not even frightened me. He did the same before.''

@end quotation

We read in the 'Dūta Jātaka' (260) about a monk who was very greedy.
Also in former lives he had been greedy. The Buddha said to him: 

@quotation

``You were greedy before, monk, as you are now; and in olden days for
your greed you had your head cleft with a sword.'' 

@end quotation

The Buddha related a story of one of his past lives: he had such a
craving for the dainty food of a king that he took a piece of rice
from the king's dish and this nearly cost him his life. After the
Buddha had told this story he explained the four noble Truths and the
greedy monk became an anāgāmī (the noble person who has attained the
third stage of enlightenment). While he listened to the Buddha he must
have been mindful of nāma and rūpa and his paññā developed to the
degree that all clinging to sensuous objects could be eradicated.

In the 'Tila-Muṭṭhi Jātaka (252) we read about a monk who fell easily
into a rage and spoke roughly. The Buddha said: 

@quotation

``This is not the first time, monks, that this man has been
passionate. He was just the same before.'' 

@end quotation

He then related a story of one of his past lives. After the discourse
the Buddha explained the four noble Truths and the passionate monk
became an anāgāmī. He eradicated anger completely. Even though one has
strong inclinations to greed and anger, accumulated for many lives,
the paññā of the eightfold Path can eventually eradicate defilements.
The greedy monk and the angry monk in the above mentioned Jātakas
could attain enlightenment because they had also accumulated sati and
paññā. Listening to the Buddha was the right condition for them to
attain the stage of the anāgāmī.

If we understand that our behaviour now is conditioned by accumulated
inclinations we had in the past we will be less inclined to take it
for 'my behaviour'. Each reality which arises is conditioned.
Generosity which arises is conditioned by generosity in the past, it
is not 'my generosity'. Anger which arises is conditioned by anger in
the past, it is not 'my anger'. There is no self who can force citta
to be kusala citta, but conditions can be cultivated so that kusala
citta can arise more often. Important conditions for the arising of
kusala citta with paññā are friendship with a person who has right
understanding of the Dhamma and who can explain the Dhamma in the
right way, listening to the teachings and studying them, and above all
mindfulness of the reality which appears now. 

We should consider why we want to perform kusala kamma. Is our aim
kusala vipāka? Kusala kamma produces kusala vipāka because this is the
natural course of things, but if we want to perform kusala kamma in
order to have a pleasant result, such as a happy rebirth, there is
clinging. The aim of the Buddha's teachings is the eradication of
defilements. Wholesome deeds will be purer if we perform them because
we see the benefit of eliminating defilements. Since human life is
very short we should not lose any opportunity for dāna, sīla or
bhāvanā. If we develop the eightfold Path there will eventually be
purification of all defilements. 

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
There is cetanā also when we are sound asleep.
What is its function at such a moment? 

@item
When we observe sīla
what is the function of cetanā? 

@item
Which cetasika is akusala kamma
or kusala kamma? 

@item
How can a deed performed in the past produce a
result later on? 

@item
What kind of result can be produced by akusala
kamma patha (unwholesome course of action) which is completed? 

@item
What are the other forms of vipāka produced by kamma, apart from
rebirth-consciousness? 

@item
What is the effect of the accumulation
of tendencies to good and evil? 

@item
When we laugh is there akusala
citta? 

@item
When we are daydreaming can there be akusala citta?

@item
What are the conditions for kusala citta to arise more often?

@end enumerate

@node Volition in the Cycle of Birth and Death
@chapter Volition in the Cycle of Birth and Death

Cetanā, volition, is a cetasika which arises with every citta, as we
have seen. Seeing, hearing or thinking which arise now are accompanied
by cetanā. Every type of cetanā performs the function of coordinating
the different tasks of the accompanying dhammas, no matter whether the
citta is kusala citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta or kiriyacitta.

When cetanā accompanies kusala citta or akusala citta it performs,
besides the function of coordinating, another function: it ``wills''
kusala or akusala and it can motivate a wholesome or an unwholesome
deed through body, speech or mind. Kusala cetanā and akusala cetanā,
which are actually @emph{kusala kamma} and @emph{akusala kamma,} are
capable of producing the appropriate results of the deeds they
motivated.

Kusala kamma and akusala kamma can produce results in the form of
rebirth-consciousness in different planes of existence or in the form
of vipākacittas which arise in the course of one's life, such as
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting or the experience of tangibles
through the body-sense. We experience pleasant objects and unpleasant
objects through the senses and it depends on kamma whether we have a
pleasant experience or an unpleasant experience through these senses.

Cetanā or kamma which motivates a good deed or a bad deed falls away
immediately together with the citta, but since each citta is succeeded
by the next one, kamma is accumulated and thus it can produce its
result later on, even in a next life. How do we know whether there is
a next life? We will understand more about the next life if we
understand our life right now. By the term 'human life' in
conventional language we mean the duration of time we are in this
human plane of existence. However, in order to know the truth we
should know @emph{realities}, not merely conventional terms. In fact,
our life consists of innumerable moments of citta which arise and fall
away, succeeding one another. There is birth and death of citta at
each moment and thus life lasts as long as one moment of citta. When
there is citta which sees, there is only that citta, there cannot be
any other citta at the same time. At that moment our life is seeing.
Seeing does not last, it falls away again. When there is citta which
hears there is only that citta and our life is hearing. This citta
also falls away and is succeeded by the next one. In this life we see
and hear pleasant and unpleasant objects, we have pleasant feeling,
unpleasant feeling or indifferent feeling. We are full of attachment,
aversion and ignorance. Sometimes we perform wholesome deeds: we are
generous, we abstain from killing and we develop right understanding.
Our life actually consists of one moment of citta which experiences an
object. The citta of a moment ago has fallen away completely, but
right now another citta has arisen and this falls away again. When we
understand that there are conditions for each citta to be succeeded by
the next one, we will also understand that the last citta of this
life, the dying-consciousness, will be succeeded by a next citta which
is the rebirth-consciousness of the next life. So long as we are in
the cycle of birth and death there are conditions for citta to arise
and to be succeeded by a next one.

Rebirth-consciousness, the first citta of life, and its accompanying
cetasikas are the mental result of kamma. In the planes where there
are nāma and rūpa kamma also produces rūpas from the first moment of
life. Also throughout life there are rūpas produced by kamma such as
eyesense, earsense and the other senses which are the means for
vipākacittas to experience pleasant or unpleasant objects. The rūpas
produced by kamma are the physical results of kamma. The different
rūpas of our body are not only produced by kamma, but also by citta,
by temperature and by nutrition. Thus, there are four factors which
each produce different rūpas of our body.

In this life we perform good deeds and bad deeds; we do not know which
deed will produce the next rebirth-consciousness. Also a deed which
was performed in a past life is capable of producing the next
rebirth-consciousness. Since we are now in the human plane of
existence, it was kusala kamma which produced the first citta of our
life; birth in the human plane is a happy rebirth. If the kamma which
will produce the rebirth-consciousness of the next life is akusala
kamma, there will be an unhappy rebirth, and if it is kusala kamma
there will be a happy rebirth. Nobody can choose his own rebirth, the
rebirth-consciousness is a conditioned dhamma, it is saṅkhāra dhamma.
This life consists of citta, cetasika and rūpa which are conditioned
dhammas. Also in a next life there are bound to be citta, cetasika and
rūpa, conditioned dhammas. There will be kusala cittas, akusala
cittas, vipākacittas and kiriyacittas. If we are not born in an
unhappy plane there can be again the development of right
understanding.

Since kusala kamma and akusala kamma are capable of producing
rebirth-consciousness, they are a link in the @emph{'Dependant
Origination'} (Paṭiccasamuppāda, the conditional origination of
phenomena). The doctrine of the 'Dependant Origination' explains the
conditions for the continuation of the cycle of birth and death by way
of twelve links, starting from @emph{ignorance} (avijjā). Ignorance
is mentioned as the first link. It is because of not knowing realities
as they are, that we have to be born and that we have to suffer old
age, sickness and death. The eradication of ignorance is the end of
the cycle and thus the end of dukkha. 

Ignorance, the first link, conditions @emph{saṅkhāra}, the second
link. Saṅkhāra are the @emph{kusala cetanās and akusala cetanās}, the
@emph{kammas}, which are capable of producing vipāka. Saṅkhāra
conditions @emph{viññāṇa} (consciousness). Viññāṇa, the third link, is
vipākacitta which can be rebirth-consciousness or vipākacitta arising
throughout life such as seeing or hearing. The Dependant Origination
represents the conditions for our present life and our life in the
future, thus, the conditions for the continuation of the cycle of
birth and death.

@emph{Saṅkhāra}, the second link in the Dependant Origination, is
@emph{cetanā} in its function of kamma which produces vipāka, so that
the cycle of birth and death continues@footnote{Saṅkhāra is often
translated as 'kamma-formation'.}. Under this aspect cetanā is also
called @emph{abhisaṅkhāra.} The prefix 'abhi' is sometimes used in the
sense of preponderance. Cetanā which is kusala kamma or akusala kamma
has preponderance in the conditioning of rebirth. Only cetanā which
accompanies kusala citta or akusala citta can be 'abhisaṅkhāra'.
Cetanā which accompanies vipākacitta and kiriyacitta cannot be
abhisaṅkhāra.@footnote{For details see Visuddhimagga XVII, 177-182.} 

All abhisaṅkhāras or ``kamma-formations'' are a link in the Dependent
Origination, they are conditioned by ignorance. Kusala kamma is still
conditioned by ignorance, although at the moment of kusala citta there
is no ignorance accompanying the citta. So long as there is ignorance
we perform kamma which can produce vipāka; we will be reborn and thus
the cycle continues. We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XVII, 119)
that the ignorant man is like a blind person:

@example

As one born blind, who gropes along
Without assistance from a guide,
Chooses a road that may be right
At one time, at another wrong,
So while this foolish man pursues
The round of births without a guide,
Now to do merit he may choose
And now demerit in such plight.
But when the Dhamma he comes to know
And penetrates the Truths beside,
Then ignorance is put to flight
At last, and he in peace may go.

@end example

While we study the different aspects of cetanā we can see that cetanā
is different as it arises with different cittas. Cetanā which
accompanies kusala citta or akusala citta ``wills'' kusala or akusala
and it is capable of producing vipāka; it is, except in the case of
cetanā which accompanies magga-citta, abhisaṅkhāra or kamma-formation.
The cetanās which accompany rūpāvacara citta and arūpāvacara citta can
produce rebirth in higher planes of existence, in rūpa-brahma planes
and arūpa-brahma planes, they are a link in the Dependant Origination.
Cetanā which accompanies vipākacitta is vipāka, it is produced by
akusala kamma or kusala kamma. This type of cetanā has only the
function of coordinating the other dhammas it accompanies. The cetanā
which accompanies kiriyacitta is not kusala or akusala, nor is it
vipāka; it is of the jāti which is kiriya, inoperative. This type of
cetanā has only the function of coordinating.

Cetanā which accompanies lokuttara citta is not a link in the
Dependant Origination. The lokuttara citta which is 'magga-citta'
(path-consciousness) produces vipāka (the phala-citta or
fruit-consciousness) immediately; the phala-citta succeeds the
magga-citta. Since the magga-citta eradicates defilements it will free
one from the cycle of birth and death. The arahat is freed from
rebirth. He does not perform kamma which can produce vipāka. The
cetanā which accompanies the kiriyacittas of the arahat and the
ahetuka kiriyacitta which is the hasituppāda-citta (smile-producing
consciousness) of the arahat, is not abhisaṅkhāra, it is not a link in
the Dependant Origination@footnote{The arahat has no kusala cittas nor
akusala cittas, cittas which are cause, which can motivate kamma which
produces result. Instead he has kiriya cittas, inoperative cittas,
which do not produce result.}.

As we have seen, cetanā which is kusala kamma or akusala kamma can
produce vipāka. Time and again there are pleasant or unpleasant
experiences through the senses and these are vipākacittas: we see,
hear, smell, taste or experience through the bodysense pleasant or
unpleasant objects. We may know in theory that vipākacittas are cittas
which are result, different from kusala cittas and akusala cittas, but
theoretical knowledge is not enough. We should learn to distinguish
different types of citta when they appear. Each situation in life
consists of many different moments which arise because of different
types of conditions. For example, when we hurt ourselves because of an
accident, there is an unpleasant experience through the bodysense
which is vipāka, but the moments of vipāka fall away immediately and
very shortly afterwards aversion is bound to arise. It is difficult to
distinguish the moment of vipāka from the moment of akusala citta;
cittas succeed one another very rapidly. When we think: 'This is
vipāka', the moments of vipāka have fallen away already, and the
cittas which think are either kusala or akusala. There are different
types of conditions for the cittas which arise. The akusala cittas and
kusala cittas are conditioned by the accumulated tendencies to kusala
and akusala, whereas the experience of a pleasant or unpleasant object
through one of the senses such as seeing or hearing is vipāka, which
is conditioned by kamma.

Cetanā is @emph{saṅkhāra dhamma}, a conditioned dhamma. It is
conditioned by the citta and the other cetasikas it accompanies. The
word saṅkhāra has different meanings, depending on the context in
which it is used. The word ``saṅkhāra'' used in the context of the
Dependant Origination, means ``kamma-formation''. Cetanā as a link in
the Dependant Origination is kamma-formation, kamma which is capable
of producing vipāka so that the cycle of birth and death continues.

At this moment we are in the cycle of birth and death and we cling to
life, we want to go on living. We think that life is desirable because
we do not know what life really is: only nāma and rūpa which do not
stay. We cling to the self, we want to be liked and admired by others,
we want to be successful in our work. However, we have many
frustrations in life; when we do not get what we want we are
disappointed. So long as there are defilements there is no end to the
cycle of birth and death, but there can be an end to the cycle if we
begin to know this moment of seeing, visible object, hearing, sound or
thinking as it is, as only conditioned realities which do not stay. We
are forgetful of realities very often, but reminders to be aware are
right at hand. We can be reminded to be aware when we notice our own
as well as other people's clinging to all objects and the sorrow
caused by clinging.

In the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (III, First Fifty, Chapter 3, par23,
Understanding) we read that the five khandhas, that is all conditioned
realities which appear in our life, have to be understood as they are.
We read that the Buddha, while he was at Sāvatthī, said to the monks:

@quotation

Monks, I will show you things that are to be understood, likewise
understanding. Do you listen to it.

And what, monks, are the things to be understood? Body, monks, is a
thing to be understood; feeling is a thing to be understood;
perception, the activities (saṅkhārakkhandha) and consciousness also.
These, monks, are 'the things that are to be understood.'

And what, monks, is 'understanding?'

The destruction of lust, the destruction of hatred, the destruction of
illusion; that, monks, is called 'understanding'.

If there is awareness and understanding right now of seeing, hearing
or any other reality which appears, there will eventually be an end to
rebirth.

@end quotation

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
How can we know that there is a next life?

@item
Which kinds of cetanā are a link in the Dependant Origination?

@item
Why is cetanā which accompanies magga-citta not kamma-formation?

@item
Kusala kamma is capable of producing vipāka and thus it is a
link in the Dependant Origination. Why does it still make sense to
perform kusala kamma? 

@end enumerate 

@node Concentration 
@chapter Concentration 

@section Concentration (ekaggatā)

Ekaggatā, concentration or one-pointedness, is another cetasika among
the seven 'universals' which arises with every citta: with kusala
citta, akusala citta, vipākacitta and kiriyacitta. It arises with all
cittas of all planes of consciousness, but, as we will see, its
quality is different as it arises with different cittas. 

The characteristic of citta is cognizing an object and thus, every
citta which arises must have an object. There is no citta without an
object and each citta can know only one object at a time. @dfn{Ekaggatā} is
the cetasika which has as function to focus on that one object.
Seeing-consciousness, for example, can only know visible object, it
cannot know any other object and ekaggatā focuses on visible object.
Hearing-consciousness can only know sound, it cannot know visible
object or any other object and ekaggatā focuses on sound.

The word 'object' (ārammaṇa) as it is used in the Abhidhamma does not
have the same meaning as the word 'object' or 'thing' we use in common
language. In common language we may call a thing such as a vase an
object. We may think that we can see a vase, touch it and know that it
is a vase all at the same time. In reality there are different cittas
which know different 'objects' (ārammaṇas) through their appropriate
doorways. These cittas arise one at a time and know only one object at
a time. The citta which sees knows only visible object, it cannot know
tactile object or a concept. Visible object is that which is
experienced through the eyes. What is seen cannot be touched. We may
understand this in theory, but the truth should be verified by being
mindful of different objects which appear one at a time.

When we speak about an ārammaṇa, an object, we have to specify
@emph{which kind of ārammaṇa.} There is @emph{visible object} which is
known through the eye-door. There is @emph{sound} which is known
through the ear-door. @emph{Smell,} @emph{taste} and @emph{tactile
object} are known through their appropriate sense-doors. Through the
mind-door all these objects can be known as well. Everything which is
real and also concepts and ideas, which are not real in the absolute
sense, can be known through the mind-door. Thus we see that the word
'object' in the Abhidhamma has a very precise meaning.

Ekaggatā which has as function to focus on an object is translated as
'one-pointedness' or concentration. When we hear the word
concentration we may believe that ekaggatā only occurs in samatha,
tranquil meditation, but this is not so. It is true that when calm is
developed ekaggatā also develops, but ekaggatā does not only occur in
samatha. Ekaggatā accompanies @emph{every citta}, although its quality
is different as it arises with different cittas. Even when we are, as
we call it in common language, 'distracted', there is ekaggatā arising
with the akusala citta since it arises with every citta. It focuses on
the object which is cognized at that moment. For example, when there
is moha-mūla-citta (citta rooted in ignorance) accompanied by uddhacca
(restlessness), there is also ekaggatā cetasika accompanying that
citta. There is ekaggatā arising with all types of akusala citta. When
we enjoy a beautiful sight or pleasant music there is ekaggatā
cetasika with the lobha-mūla-citta. At that moment we are absorbed in
the pleasant object and enslaved to it. There is concentration when
one performs ill deeds. 

Ekaggatā which accompanies akusala citta is also called
'micchā-samādhi', wrong concentration. Ekaggatā which accompanies
kusala citta is also called 'sammā-samādhi', right concentration.
@emph{Samādhi} is another word for ekaggatā cetasika. Although wrong
concentration and right concentration are both ekaggatā cetasika their
qualities are different. Sammā-samādhi focuses on the object in the
right way, the wholesome way. There are many levels of right
concentration.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (1, Part IV, Chapter 1. 118, 119) states about
ekaggatā, and here it deals actually with sammā-samādhi@footnote{See
also Dhammasangaṇi par11.} :

@quotation

This concentration, known as one-pointedness of mind, has
non-scattering (of itself) or non-distraction (of associated states)
as characteristic, the welding together of the coexistent states as
function, as water kneads bath-powder into a paste, and peace of mind
or knowledge as manifestation. For it has been said: 'He who is
concentrated knows, sees according to the truth.' It is distinguished
by having ease (sukha) (usually) as proximate cause@footnote{Pleasant
feeling, sukha, is a jhāna-factor arising only in four stages of
rūpa-jhāna. It supports samādhi in focusing on the meditation subject.
In the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna pleasant feeling is abandoned and
indifferent feeling accompanies the jhāna-citta instead.}. Like the
steadiness of a lamp in the absence of wind, so should steadfastness
of mind be understood.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 139) gives a similar definition, except
that it mentions only peace of mind as manifestation, not knowledge.

Sammā-samādhi is one of the jhāna-factors which are developed in
samatha in order to suppress the hindrances and attain
jhāna@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily Life Chapter 22.} . The jhāna
factors of applied thought (vitakka), sustained thought (vicāra),
enthusiasm (pīti), happy feeling (sukha) and samādhi have to be
developed together in order to attain jhāna. All the jhāna-factors
assist the citta to attain tranquillity by means of a meditation
subject. 

Some people take wrong concentration for right concentration of
samatha. They want to try to concentrate on one point with the desire
to become relaxed. Then there is akusala citta with clinging to
relaxation. The aim of samatha is not what we mean by the word
'relaxation' in common language, but it is the temporary elimination
of defilements. In order to develop samatha in the right way, right
understanding of its development is indispensable. Right understanding
should know precisely when the citta is kusala citta and when akusala
citta and it should know the characteristic of calm so that it can be
developed. There are different stages of calm and as calm becomes
stronger, samādhi also develops@footnote{In the beginning stage of
calm there is still preparatory concentration (parikamma-samādhi)
(Vis. IV, 31-33). When calm has reached the degree that it is
approaching jhāna there is access-concentration (upacāra-samādhi).
When jhāna has been attained there is at that moment samādhi which is
attainment-concentration (appanā-samādhi).}. Ekaggatā cetasika which
accompanies rūpāvacara citta (rūpa-jhānacitta) is altogether different
from ekaggatā arising with kāmāvacara citta, citta of the
sense-sphere. In each of the higher stages of jhāna there is a higher
degree of calm and thus ekaggatā becomes more refined. Ekaggatā which
accompanies arūpāvacara citta is different again: it is more tranquil
and more refined than ekaggatā arising with rūpāvacara citta.

There is also sammā-samādhi of vipassanā. As we have seen, the second
manifestation of ekaggatā cetasika or samādhi mentioned by the
@emph{Atthasālinī} is knowledge or wisdom. When paññā knows a nāma or
a rūpa as it is, there is at that moment also right concentration
performing its function. Sammā-samādhi is one of the factors of the
eightfold Path. When paññā knows, for example, the visible object
which presents itself as only a rūpa appearing through the eyes or the
seeing which presents itself as only a nāma which experiences visible
object, there is also right concentration at that moment: sammā
samādhi focuses on the object in the right way. When sammā-samādhi
accompanies lokuttara citta, sammā-samādhi is also lokuttara and it
focuses on nibbāna. Then sammā-samādhi is a factor of the supramundane
eightfold Path (lokuttara magga). 

Some people believe that in the development of vipassanā they should
try to focus on particular nāmas and rūpas in order to know them as
they are. If concentration accompanies a citta with desire for result
it is wrong concentration. So long as one has not become a sotāpanna (
the person who has attained the first stage of enlightenment) the
inclination to wrong practice has not been eradicated. We may still be
led by desire and then we are on the wrong way. When a nāma or rūpa
appears through one of the six doors there can be mindfulness of it
and then, at that moment, right understanding of that reality can be
developed. Right understanding is accompanied by right concentration
which has arisen because of the appropriate conditions and which
performs its function without the need to think of focusing on a
particular object. Mindfulness, right understanding and right
concentration are realities which arise because of their own
conditions, they are anattā. There is no self who can direct the
arising of any citta or who can regulate the experiencing of a
particular object. But the conditions for right mindfulness and right
understanding can be cultivated; they are: studying the realities the
Buddha taught and considering them when they appear in daily life.

In the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Fours, Chapter V, par1,
Concentration) we read about four ways of developing concentration. As
to the first way, the Buddha explained that this is the development of
the four stages of jhāna which leads to 'happy living' in this life.
As to the second kind, this is the concentration on 'consciousness of
light' which is a meditation subject of samatha. This leads to
'knowledge and insight' which means in this context, according to the
commentary (Manorathapūraṇī), clairvoyance.

As regards the third way of developing concentration, this leads, if
developed and made much of, to 'mindfulness and well-awareness'. We
read:

@quotation

Herein, monks, the feelings which arise in a monk are evident to him,
the feelings which abide with him are evident to him, the feelings
which come to an end in him are evident to him. The perceptions which
arise in him@dots{}the trains of thought which arise in him, which
abide with him, which come to an end in him are evident to him. This
monks, is called 'the making-concentration-to-become which conduces to
mindfulness and well-awareness'.

@end quotation

As regard the fourth way of developing concentration, this leads to
the destruction of the 'āsavas' (defilements). We read:

@quotation

And what sort of making-concentration-to-become, if developed and made
much of, conduces to the destruction of the āsavas?

Herein a monk dwells observing the rise and fall in the five khandhas
of grasping, thus: Such is rūpa, such is the arising of rūpa, such its
vanishing. Such is feeling @dots{}such is perception @dots{}such are
the activities @dots{}Such is consciousness, such is the arising of
consciousness, such the vanishing of consciousness. This, monks, is
called 'the making-concentration-to-become which conduces to the
destruction of the āsavas'. These are the four forms of it. Moreover,
in this connection I thus spoke in 'The Chapter on the Goal' in (the
sutta called) 'The Questions of Puṇṇaka':

@end quotation

@example

By searching in the world things high and low,
He who has naught to stir him in the world,
Calm and unclouded, cheerful, freed of longing,
He has crossed over birth and old age, I say.

@end example

When there is right mindfulness of a nāma or rūpa which appears,
without trying to focus on a particular object, there is also right
concentration which arises at that moment because of the appropriate
conditions and performs its function. When right understanding
develops it penetrates the arising and ceasing of the five khandhas
and eventually there will be the destruction of the āsavas at the
attainment of arahatship. 

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Are ekaggatā and samādhi the same cetasika?

@item
Can there be samādhi with akusala citta? 

@item
What is the
difference between sammā-samādhi in samatha and sammā-samādhi in
vipassanā? 

@item
If we try to concentrate on sound is that the way to
know sound as it is? 

@end enumerate

@node Vitality and Attention
@chapter Vitality and Attention

@section Vitality (jīvitindriya)

Jīvitindriya (life-faculty or vitality) and @emph{manasikāra}
(attention) are two other cetasikas among the seven universals which
arise with every citta. As regards @emph{jīvitindriya},@footnote{
Jīvitaṃ means ``life'', and indriya means ``controlling faculty''.}
this cetasika sustains the life of the citta and cetasikas it
accompanies. According to the @emph{Atthasālinī} (part IV, Chapter I,
123, 124)@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi par19.} the characteristic
of jīvitindriya is ``ceaseless watching'', its function is to maintain
the life of the accompanying dhammas, its manifestation the
establishment of them, and the proximate cause are the dhammas which
have to be sustained.

The function of jīvitindriya is to maintain the life of citta and its
accompanying cetasikas. It keeps them going until they fall away.
Since jīvitindriya arises and falls away together with the citta, it
performs its function only for a very short while. Each moment of
citta consists actually of three extremely short periods:

@itemize

@item
the arising moment (uppāda khaṇa)

@item
the moment of its presence, or static moment (tiṭṭhi khaṇa)

@item
the dissolution moment (bhaṅga khaṇa) 

@end itemize

Jīvitindriya arises with the citta at the arising moment and it
maintains the life of citta and the accompanying cetasikas, but it
cannot make them stay beyond the dissolution moment; then jīvitindriya
has to fall away together with the citta and the accompanying
cetasikas. 

The Atthasālinī states concerning jīvitindriya:

@quotation
@dots{}it watches over those states (the accompanying dhammas) only
in the moment of (their and its) existence, as water over lotuses,
etc. And although it watches over them, arisen as its own property,
as a nurse over the infant, life goes on only by being bound up with
these states ( accompanying dhammas) that have gone on, as the pilot
on the boat. Beyond the dissolution moment it does not go on, owing to
the non-being both of itself and of the states which should have been
kept going. At the dissolution moment it does not maintain them, owing
to its own destruction, as the spent oil in the wick cannot maintain
the flame of the lamp. Its effective power is as its duration.

@end quotation

Citta and cetasikas cannot arise without jīvitindriya which maintains
their lives and jīvitindriya cannot arise without citta and the
accompanying cetasikas. When, for example, seeing arises, jīvitindriya
must accompany seeing. Seeing needs jīvitindriya in order to subsist
during the very short period of its life. When seeing falls away
jīvitindriya also falls away. Then another citta arises and this citta
is accompanied by another jīvitindriya which sustains citta and the
accompanying cetasikas during that very short moment of their
existence. Jīvitindriya has to arise with every citta in order to
vitalize citta and its accompanying cetasikas.

The cetasika jīvitindriya which vitalizes the accompanying
nāma-dhammas is nāma. There is also jīvitindriya which is
rūpa.@footnote{See Visuddhimagga XIV, 59} Rūpa-jīvitindriya is a kind
of rūpa produced by kamma and it maintains the life of the other rūpas
it arises together with. Rūpas arise and fall away in groups, some of
which are produced by kamma, some by citta, some by nutrition and some
by temperature. Jīvitindriya is part of only the groups or rūpa which
are produced by kamma. It maintains the life of the rūpas it
accompanies and then it falls away together with them.

We used to take life for something which lasts. We cling to life and
we take it for 'mine' and 'self'. However, there is no physical life
nor mental life which lasts. Life-faculty is saṅkhāra dhamma,
conditioned dhamma, which does not stay and which is not self. The
study of the reality of jīvitindriya can remind us that life lasts
only for a moment and then falls away to be succeeded by a next
moment.

@section Attention (manasikāra)

Manasikāra, attention, is another cetasika
among the universals which arises with every citta.@footnote{There are
also two kinds of citta which are called manasikāra (Atthasālinī 133
and Visuddhimagga XIV, 152). One kind of citta which is manasikāra is
the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (five-sense-door
adverting-consciousness), the first citta of the sense-door process,
which adverts to the object; it is called 'controller of the
sense-door process'. The other kind of citta which is manasikāra is
the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta (mind-door adverting-consciousness) which
adverts to the object through the mind-door and is succeeded by the
javana cittas. It is called 'controller of the javanas'.} The
@emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter 1, 133) which defines
manasikāra in the same wording as the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 152)
states concerning the cetasika which is manasikāra:

@quotation
@dots{}It has the characteristic of driving associated states towards
the object, the function of joining (yoking) associated states to the
object, the manifestation of facing the object. It is included in the
saṅkhārakkhandha, and should be regarded as the charioteer of
associated states because it regulates the object.

@end quotation

The (XIV, 152) adds that the proximate cause of manasikāra is an
object.

The cetasika manasikāra which can be translated as attention is the
'controller of the object' because it turns the citta towards the
object. However, also at the moments we are, as we call it in
conventional language, 'distracted' and we think that we are without
attention, there is still manasikāra with the citta since it
accompanies every citta. Also when there is moha-mūla-citta
accompanied by uddhacca (restlessness), citta cognizes an object;
manasikāra accompanies the citta and 'joins' citta and the other
cetasikas to that object. Every citta needs manasikāra in order to
cognize an object.

There is citta at this moment and thus there must also be manasikāra.
Manasikāra is different from phassa which contacts the object so that
citta can experience it, and it is different from ekaggatā cetasika
which focuses on one object. Manasikāra has its own task while it
assists the citta in cognizing the object. Manasikāra has attention
to whatever object presents itself through one of the six doors and it
'joins' citta and the accompanying cetasikas to that object.

Manasikāra is different according as it arises with different types of
citta. When, for example, seeing arises, it is accompanied by
manasikāra which joins seeing and the accompanying cetasikas to
visible object. Seeing is vipāka and thus manasikāra is also vipāka.
Shortly after the seeing there can be attention to the shape and form
of something and then the object is not visible object but a concept.
At that moment there is another type of citta accompanied by another
manasikāra. At each moment manasikāra is different. When there is
lobha-mūla-citta, akusala citta rooted in attachment, manasikāra which
accompanies lobha-mūla-citta is also akusala. When there is kusala
citta the manasikāra which accompanies the kusala citta is also
kusala.

When manasikāra accompanies a citta which cultivates samatha, it
'joins' citta and the other cetasikas to the meditation subject, such
as a corpse or the Buddha's virtues. When the citta is rūpāvacara
kusala citta, the accompanying manasikāra is also rūpāvacara; it is
different from manasikāra which is kāmāvacara (belonging to the sense
sphere). Rūpāvacara citta experiences the meditation subject with
absorption and the accompanying manasikāra 'joins' citta and the
accompanying cetasikas to that object. The manasikāra which
accompanies arūpāvacara citta is still more tranquil and more refined
than the manasikāra which accompanies rūpāvacara citta. When
manasikāra accompanies the citta which develops vipassanā, right
understanding of nāma and rūpa, there is attention towards the nāma or
rūpa which is the object of mindfulness at that moment; manasikāra
assists the citta and joins it to that nāma or rūpa. When manasikāra
accompanies lokuttara citta, manasikāra is also lokuttara and it joins
citta and the accompanying cetasikas to the object which is nibbāna.

We are likely to have a concept of self which has attention to this or
that object, but attention, manasikāra, is a @emph{conditioned
dhamma,} it is conditioned by the citta and the cetasikas it
accompanies, it arises and falls away together with them. At each
moment there is a different citta and thus also a different
manasikāra.

The @emph{seven universals} have each their own specific
characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause and they
have different qualities as they arise with cittas of different jātis
and of different planes of consciousness. Summarizing the seven
'universals', they are:

@itemize

@item
phassa (contact)

@item
vedanā (feeling)

@item
saññā (remembrance)

@item
cetanā (volition)

@item
ekaggatā ( concentration or one-pointedness)

@item
jīvitindriya (life faculty)

@item
manasikāra (attention)

@end itemize

All the 'universals' arise with every citta and they share the same
object with the citta. They are all of the same jāti as the citta they
accompany and of the same plane or consciousness. In the planes of
existence where there are both nāma and rūpa, cetasikas arise at the
same 'base', vatthu, as the citta they accompany and thus, they may
arise at the eye-base, ear-base nose-base, tongue-base, body-base or
heart-base.

Cetasikas never arise by themselves, they always accompany citta and
other cetasikas. Therefore, when we study cetasikas, we should also
study the different cittas they accompany.

There are other cetasikas besides the 'universals' which can arise
with the citta, but there have to be at least the seven 'universals'
with every citta.

There are ten types of cittas which are accompanied only by the
'universals', not by other cetasikas. These are the 'five pairs'
(dvi-pañcaviññāṇa) which are: seeing-consciousness,
hearing-consciousness, smelling-consciousness, tasting-consciousness
and body-consciousness. These cittas are ahetuka (rootless)
vipākacittas which can be either kusala vipāka or akusala vipāka and
therefore, they are ``five pairs''.

When seeing-consciousness arises, each of the 'universals' which
accompanies it performs its own function. Phassa which accompanies
seeing-consciousness is eye-contact (cakkhu-samphassa). It contacts
visible object. When there is eye-contact there is the coinciding of
eye-base, visible object and seeing-consciousness. Vedanā, which is in
this case indifferent feeling, experiences the 'taste' of visible
object. Saññā 'marks' and remembers visible object. Cetanā
coordinates the tasks of the accompanying dhammas. Since
seeing-consciousness is vipākacitta, cetanā merely coordinates, it
does not 'will' kusala or akusala. Ekaggatā performs its function of
focusing on visible object; it does not focus on any other object.
Jīvitindriya sustains citta and the accompanying cetasikas until they
fall away. Manasikāra 'drives' citta and the accompanying cetasikas
towards visible object. Seeing-consciousness needs the accompanying
'universals' in order to cognize visible object; it could not arise
and cognize its object without the assistance of the accompanying
cetasikas.

As we have seen, only the dvi-pañcaviññāṇas are not accompanied by
other cetasikas besides the 'universals'. All the other cittas which
arise in the sense-door process and in the mind-door process and also
the paṭisandhi-citta, rebirth-consciousness, the bhavanga-citta,
life-continuum, and the cuti-citta, dying-consciousness, are
accompanied by other cetasikas besides the 'universals'.

The 'universals' have different qualities as they arise with different
cittas. For example, when kusala citta arises all the accompanying
cetasikas, the 'universals' included, are kusala as well. Vedanā,
feeling, which accompanies kusala citta can be pleasant feeling or
indifferent feeling. Cetanā, volition, which accompanies kusala citta
has a double function: it coordinates the tasks of the accompanying
dhammas and it 'wills' kusala. If it motivates wholesome deeds it is
capable of producing the appropriate result when it is the right time
for it. Thus, kusala cetanā is different from cetanā which accompanies
vipākacitta.

When the citta is akusala, all the accompanying cetasikas are akusala
as well. Vedanā which accompanies akusala citta can be pleasant
feeling (in the case of lobha-mūla-citta), unpleasant feeling (in the
case of dosa-mūla-citta), or indifferent feeling (in the case of
lobha-mūla-citta and moha-mūla-citta). As regards cetanā which
accompanies akusala citta, this has a double function: it coordinates
the accompanying dhammas on the object and it 'wills' akusala. If it
motivates unwholesome deeds it is capable of producing the appropriate
result when it is the right time. Ekaggatā, concentration or
one-pointedness, which accompanies akusala citta is different from
ekaggatā which accompanies kusala citta. Thus we see that mental
phenomena which arise together condition one another. If we have more
understanding of the many different conditions for the phenomena which
arise, it will help us to see them as elements, not as a person, a
self.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Does manasikāra, attention, arise when we are
sound asleep? 

@item
Can manasikāra be lokuttara? 

@item
Do
nāma-jīvitindriya and rūpa-jīvitindriya have different functions?

@item
Which types of citta are accompanied only by the seven
'universals' and not by other cetasikas? 

@item
Each of the
'universals' has its specific characteristic, function, manifestation
and proximate cause. Why can each one of them still have different
qualities at different moments? 

@item
Through how many doors can the
'universals' experience an object? 

@item
Can the 'universals'
experience a concept? 

@item
When the citta is akusala citta, it is
accompanied by akusala cetasikas. Are the accompanying 'universals'
akusala as well? 

@end enumerate 

@unnumbered PART II: The Particulars

@node Applied thinking and Sustained thinking 
@chapter Applied thinking and Sustained thinking 

@section The Particulars (pakiṇṇakā)

Seven cetasikas, the @emph{universals} (sabbacitta-sādhāranā), arise
with every citta. Besides these seven cetasikas there are @emph{six
cetasikas}, the @emph{particulars} (pakiṇṇakā)@emph{,} which accompany
@emph{cittas of the four jātis but not every citta.} Both the
``universals'' and the ``particulars'' are of the same jāti as the
citta they accompany. Thus, they can be kusala, akusala, vipāka or
kiriya. In addition to the ``universals'' and the ``particulars''
there are also akusala cetasikas which arise only with akusala cittas
and sobhana (beautiful) cetasikas which arise only with sobhana
cittas.

@section Applied thinking (vitakka)

@emph{Vitakka,} applied thinking or initial thinking, and
@emph{vicāra,} sustained thinking or sustained application, are two
cetasikas among the ``particulars''@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi
par7 and 8.} . We believe that we know what thinking is. We think of
what we have seen, heard, smelt, tasted or experienced through the
bodysense, or we think of ideas and concepts. We build up long
stories of what we experienced and we cling to thinking. In order to
know the realities of vitakka and vicāra we should not be misled by
the conventional term ``thinking''. Through the study of the
Abhidhamma and the commentaries we can acquire a more precise
knowledge of realities. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} ( IV, 88) defines vitakka as follows:

@quotation
@dots{}Herein, applied thinking (vitakkama) is applied thought
(vitakka); hitting upon, is what is meant. It has the characteristic
of directing the mind onto an object (mounting the mind on its
object). Its function is to strike at and thresh---for the
meditator@footnote{The Visuddhimagga deals with vitakka in the
section on samatha. The meditator is someone who cultivates samatha.}
is said, in virtue of it, to have the object touched and struck at by
applied thought. It is manifested as the leading of the mind onto an
object@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 114) gives a
similar definition. This commentary uses a simile of someone who wants
to ``ascend'' the king's palace and depends on a relative or friend
dear to the king to achieve this. In the same way the citta which is
accompanied by vitakka depends on the latter in order to ``ascend'' to
the object, to be directed to the object. Vitakka leads the citta to
the object so that citta can cognize it.

In order to know more about vitakka, we should learn which cittas are
accompanied by vitakka. We may think that vitakka accompanies only
cittas arising in a mind-door process, but this is not so. Vitakka
arises in sense-door processes as well as in mind-door processes.
Vitakka accompanies all kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the
sense-sphere), except the dvi-pañcaviññāṇas (the five pairs which are
seeing, hearing, etc.).

We may wonder why vitakka does not arise with the dvi-pañcaviññāṇas.
When seeing arises it performs the function of seeing, it sees visible
object and it does not need vitakka in order to see. The other cittas
of the eye-door process need vitakka in order to experience visible
object, they do not see. The eye-door adverting-consciousness does not
see, it adverts to visible object and it needs vitakka which directs
it to visible object. It is the same with the other cittas of that
process. As regards the other sense-door processes, the
dvi-pañcaviññāṇas do not need vitakka in order to experience the
object, but all the other cittas of these processes have to be
accompanied by vitakka. All cittas of the mind-door process are
accompanied by vitakka. 

Vitakka accompanies not only cittas arising in processes, it also
accompanies cittas which do not arise in processes: the
paṭisandhi-citta (rebirth-consciousness), the bhavanga-citta
(life-continuum) and the cuti-citta (dying-consciousness). 

When vitakka accompanies kusala citta, vitakka is also kusala, and
when it accompanies akusala citta it is also akusala. When we are not
applying ourselves to kusala, we act, speak or think with akusala
citta and thus the accompanying vitakka is also akusala. It is not
often that we are performing acts of generosity, that we apply
ourselves to sīla (good moral conduct) or to bhāvanā (mental
development). There are many more akusala cittas in our life than
kusala cittas and thus akusala vitakka is bound to arise very often.
When we are attached to a pleasant object there is akusala vitakka
which ``touches'' that object. Or when there is even a slight feeling
of annoyance when things are not the way we want them to be, there is
sure to be dosa-mūla-citta and this is accompanied by akusala vitakka
which performs its function. 

There are three kinds of @emph{akusala vitakka} which are mentioned in
particular in the suttas. They are

@itemize

@item
thought of sense-pleasures (kāma-vitakka)

@item
thought of malevolence (vyāpāda-vitakka)

@item
thought of harming (vihiṁsā-vitakka)

@end itemize

We read in the ``Discourse on the Twofold Thought'' (Middle Length
Sayings I, no. 19) that the Buddha, while he was still a Bodhisatta,
considered both akusala vitakka and kusala vitakka. We read that when
the thought of sense-pleasures arose, he comprehended thus:

@quotation
@dots{}``This thought of sense-pleasures has arisen in me, but it
conduces to self-hurt and it conduces to the hurt of others and it
conduces to the hurt of both, it is destructive of intuitive wisdom,
associated with distress, not conducive to nibbāna.'' But while I was
reflecting, ``It conduces to self-hurt'', it subsided; and while I was
reflecting, ``It conduces to the hurt of others'', it subsided; and
while I was reflecting, ``It is destructive of intuitive wisdom, it is
associated with distress, it is not conducive to nibbāna'', it
subsided. So I, monks, kept on getting rid of the thought of
sense-pleasures as it constantly arose, I kept on driving it out, I
kept on making an end of it@dots{}

@end quotation

The same is said about the thought of malevolence and the thought of
harming. We then read:

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, according to whatever a monk ponders and reflects on
much, his mind in consequence gets a bias that way. Monks, if a monk
ponder and reflect much on thought of sense-pleasures he ejects
thought of renunciation; if he makes much of the thought of
sense-pleasures, his mind inclines to the thought of sense-pleasures.
Monks, if a monk ponder and reflect much on the thought of
malevolence@dots{}he ejects the thought of non-malevolence@dots{}
his mind inclines to the thought of malevolence. Monks, if a monk
ponder and reflect much on the thought of harming, he ejects the
thought of non-harming; if he makes much of the thought of harming,
his mind inclines to the thought of harming@dots{}

@end quotation

It is useful to know on what we reflect most of the time. We have a
bias towards akusala, since we have accumulated so much akusala. We
are more inclined to unwholesome thoughts and therefore it is
difficult to have wholesome thoughts. When there is a pleasant object
the thought of sense-pleasures arises almost immediately. When there
is an unpleasant object there is bound to be a thought of annoyance or
malice, or there can even be a thought of harming. When someone else
receives praise and honour, we may be inclined to jealousy and then
there is akusala vitakka accompanying the dosa-mūla-citta with
jealousy. It is difficult to cultivate kusala vitakka but the Buddha
showed that it can be done. Further on in the sutta we read about
three kinds of kusala vitakka which are the opposites of the three
kinds of akusala vitakka. They are:

@itemize

@item
the thought of renunciation (nekkhamma)

@item
the thought of non-malevolence (avyāpāda)

@item
the thought of non-harming (avihiṁsa)

@end itemize

The bodhisatta realized that these lead neither to self-hurt, nor to
the hurt of others, nor to the hurt of both, but that they are for
``growth in intuitive wisdom'', that they are ``not associated with
distress'', ``conducive to nibbāna''. We read about kusala vitakka:

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, if a monk ponder and reflect much on the thought of
renunciation he ejects the thought of sense-pleasures; if he makes
much of the thought of renunciation, his mind inclines to the thought
of renunciation. Monks, if a monk ponder and reflect much on the
thought of non-malevolence he ejects the thought of malevolence@dots{}
Monks, if a monk ponder and reflect much on the thought of
non-harming, he ejects the thought of harming; if he makes much of the
thought of non-harming his mind inclines to the thought of
non-harming@dots{}

@end quotation

One may wonder whether nekkhamma, renunciation, is the same as
retirement from worldly life and whether it therefore pertains in
particular to monks. Although a monk's life should be a life of
contentment with little, he may not be cultivating nekkhamma. Whoever
has not eradicated attachment to sense objects has still conditions
for ``thought of sense-pleasures'', no matter whether he is a monk or
a layman. When a monk receives delicious almsfood, is attachment not
likely to arise?

There are many degrees of nekkhamma and not only monks should
cultivate it, but laypeople as well. Actually, @emph{all kusala
dhammas are nekkhamma}@footnote{Vibhaṅga, Book of Analysis, 3,
Analysis of the Elements, par182.}. When we perform dāna, observe
sīla or apply ourselves to mental development, we are at such moments
not absorbed in sense-pleasures, there is renunciation. We can
experience that when there is loving kindness or compassion we do not
think of ourselves; thus, there is a degree of detachment. If we see
the disadvantages of being selfish, of thinking of our own pleasure
and comfort, there are more conditions for being attentive to others.
Detachment from the concept of self is still a higher degree of
renunciation which can be achieved through the development of right
understanding of realities. Both monks and laypeople should cultivate
this kind of renunciation. When the concept of self has been
eradicated, stinginess has been eradicated as well, and thus, there
are more conditions for generosity. Moreover, sīla will be purer,
there will be no more conditions for transgressing the five precepts. 

@section Sustained Thinking (vicāra) 

@emph{Vicāra} can be translated as sustained
thinking, discursive thinking or sustained application. We read in the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV, 88) the following definition:

@quotation
@dots{}Sustained thinking (vicaraṇa) is sustained thought (vicāra);
continued sustenance (anusañcaraṇa), is what is meant. It has the
characteristic of continued pressure on (occupation with) the object.
Its function is to keep conascent (mental) states (occupied) with
that. It is manifested as keeping consciousness anchored (on that
object).

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (Book One, Part IV, Chapter I, 114) defines
vicāra in a similar way.

Vicāra is not the same reality as vitakka. Vitakka directs the citta
to the object and vicāra keeps the citta occupied with the object,
``anchored'' on it. However, we should remember that both vitakka and
vicāra perform their functions only for the duration of one citta and
then fall away immediately, together with the citta. Both the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} and the @emph{Atthasālinī} use similes in order
to explain the difference between vitakka and vicāra. Vitakka is gross
and vicāra is more subtle. We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} ( IV,
89):

@quotation
@dots{}Applied thought (vitakka) is the first compact of the mind in
the sense that it is both gross and inceptive, like the striking of a
bell. Sustained thought (vicāra) is the act of keeping the mind
anchored, in the sense that it is subtle with the individual essence
of continued pressure, like the ringing of the bell@dots{}

@end quotation

Several more similes are used in order to explain the difference
between vitakka and vicāra. Vitakka is like the bird's spreading out
its wings when about to soar into the air, and vicāra is quiet, like
the bird's planing with outspread wings. When we read this simile we
may think that vitakka has to come first and that then vicāra follows.
However, this simile is used in order to show that vitakka and vicāra
have different characteristics.

Another simile the @emph{Visuddhimagga} and the @emph{Atthasālinī} use
is the following : vitakka is like the bee's diving towards a lotus
and vicāra is like the bee's gyrating around the lotus after it has
dived towards it.

Like vitakka, vicāra arises with all kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the
sense-sphere, except the dvi-pañcaviññāṇas (the sense-cognitions of
seeing, hearing, etc.). When seeing-consciousness, for example,
arises, it does not need vitakka nor does it need vicāra, because
seeing-consciousness just sees. The other cittas of the eye-door
process need vitakka which directs them to visible object and they
need vicāra which keeps them occupied with visible object. It is the
same in the case of the other sense-door processes. Vitakka and vicāra
arise in sense-door processes as well as in mind-door processes, and
they also accompany cittas which do not arise in
processes@footnote{For details about the cittas accompanied by vitakka
and vicāra, see par Appendix 3.} . 

Vitakka and vicāra are conditioned dhammas, @emph{saṅkhāra dhammas,}
which arise and fall away together with the citta they accompany. They
perform their functions only during an extremely short moment, namely
the duration of one citta. Their object can be a paramattha dhamma or
a concept. We may wonder how vitakka and vicāra perform their
functions while we are engaged with the thinking of ``stories''. It
seems that thinking can last for a while, but in reality there are
many cittas accompanied by vitakka and vicāra and other cetasikas,
which arise and fall away, succeeding one another. It is because of
saññā, remembrance, that we can remember the previous thought and that
there can be connection of different thoughts.

Both @emph{vitakka} and @emph{vicāra} are @emph{jhāna-factors} which
can be developed in samatha, tranquil meditation. The jhāna-factors
are sobhana (beautiful) cetasikas which are developed in order to
inhibit the ``hindrances'', defilements which obstruct the attainment
of jhāna, absorption. Vitakka which is developed in samatha ``thinks''
of the meditation subject and it inhibits the hindrances which are
@emph{sloth} and @emph{torpor}. The
@emph{Visuddhimagga} states in the definition of vitakka (IV, 88): 
 
@quotation

``@dots{}for the meditator is said, in virtue of it, to have the
object struck at by applied thought, threshed by applied
thought@enddots{}'' 

@end quotation

Thus, in samatha vitakka ``touches'' the meditation subject again and
again until calm has developed to the degree that jhāna can be
attained.

As regards the jhāna-factor vicāra which is developed in samatha, this
keeps the citta ``anchored on'' the meditation subject and inhibits
the hindrance which is @emph{doubt.} As we have seen, in the case of
kāmāvacara cittas, both vitakka and vicāra arise together when they
accompany the citta. In the case of jhānacittas however, a distinction
has to be made. In the first stage of jhāna both vitakka and vicāra
are needed in order to experience the meditation subject with
absorption. Thus, both vitakka and vicāra accompany the rūpāvacara
kusala citta, the rūpāvacara vipākacitta and the rūpāvacara
kiriyacitta of the first stage of jhāna@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily
Life, Chapter 22. The rūpāvacara vipākacitta is the result of the
rūpāvacara kusala citta. The rūpāvacara kiriyacitta is the citta of
the arahat who attains jhāna.}. In the second stage of jhāna one has
acquired more skill in jhāna and vitakka is no longer needed in order
to experience the meditation subject with absorption. At that stage
vitakka has been abandoned, but vicāra still arises. In the subsequent
stage of jhāna, which is more tranquil and more refined, also vicāra
has been abandoned; it is no longer needed in order to experience the
meditation subject with absorption. Some people have abandoned both
vitakka and vicāra in the second stage of jhāna and thus for them
there are only four stages of rūpa-jhāna instead of five. That is why
the stages of jhāna can be counted in accordance with the
@emph{four-fold system} or the @emph{five-fold system}. 

When we consider the jhāna-factors vitakka and vicāra we may be able
to understand that vitakka is more gross than vicāra. Vitakka is
needed in the first stage of jhāna but it is abandoned in the second
stage of jhāna which is more tranquil and more refined. Vicāra which
is more subtle than vitakka still accompanies the jhānacitta of the
second stage of jhāna. The person who has accumulated conditions to
attain jhāna must be able to distinguish between different
jhāna-factors such as vitakka and vicāra and this is most intricate.
This shows us how difficult it is to develop calm to the degree of
jhāna. 

The more we study the realities which are taught in the Abhidhamma,
the more we see that there are many different phenomena which each
have their own characteristic. They appear one at a time, but when we
try to name them there is thinking of a concept instead of mindfulness
of a characteristic. Sometimes a reality which thinks may appear and
then we may doubt whether it is vitakka or vicāra. It is useless to
try to find out which reality appears because at such a moment there
is no awareness. Thinking has a characteristic which can be realized
when it appears and then there is no need to name it vitakka or
vicāra.

There is another aspect of vitakka I want to mention. Vitakka is one
of the @emph{factors of the eightfold Path} and as such it is called:
@emph{sammā-saṅkappa}, right thinking. Sammā-saṅkappa has to arise
together with sammā-diṭṭhi, right understanding, in order to be a
factor of the eightfold Path@footnote{The factors of the eightfold
Path are: right understanding (see Chapter 34), right thinking, right
speech, right action and right livelihood ( for the last three see
Chapter 32), right effort (see Chapter 10), right mindfulness (see
Chapter 26) and right concentration (see Chapter 6). These factors
perform each their specific function so that the goal can be attained:
the eradication of defilements. The reader will also come across the
terms insight or vipassanā and satipaṭṭhāna. The development of
vipassanā, the development of satipaṭṭhāna or the development of the
eightfold Path, it all amounts to the development of right
understanding of nāma and rūpa, of ultimate realities. When a reality
appears through one of the six doors there can be a moment of
investigation of its characteristic: it can be seen as a nāma or a
rūpa, not a person, not a thing. That is the beginning of
understanding of its true nature of non-self. At such a moment there
is also mindfulness, non-forgetfulness of the reality appearing at the
present moment.}. When there is right understanding of a nāma or rūpa
which appears, there are both vitakka and vicāra accompanying the
citta, but vicāra is not a factor of the eightfold Path.
Sammā-saṅkappa has its specific function as path-factor.
Sammā-saṅkappa ``touches'' the nāma or rūpa which appears so that
sammā-diṭṭhi can investigate its characteristic in order to understand
it as it is. Thus, sammā-diṭṭhi needs the assistance of sammā-saṅkappa
in order to develop. In the beginning, when paññā has not been
developed, there cannot yet be clear understanding of the difference
between the characteristic of nāma and of rūpa. When, for example,
sound appears, there is also hearing, the reality which experiences
sound, but it is difficult to know the difference between the
characteristic of sound and the characteristic of hearing, between
rūpa and nāma. Only one reality at a time can be object of mindfulness
and when they seem to ``appear'' together it is evident that there is
not right mindfulness. Only when there is right mindfulness of one
reality at a time right understanding can develop. At that moment
sammā-saṅkappa performs its function of ``touching'' the object of
mindfulness.

When there is sammā-saṅkappa there is no akusala vitakka, wrong
thinking; there is no ``thought of sense-pleasures'', no ``thought of
malice'', no ``thought of harming''. When the eightfold Path is being
developed the four noble Truths will be known and ``unprofitable
thoughts'' will eventually be eradicated. We read in the ``Kindred
Sayings'' (V, Mahā-vagga, Book XII, Chapter I, par7, thoughts) that
the Buddha, while he was at Sāvatthī, said to the monks:

@quotation

Monks, think not evil, unprofitable thoughts, such as: thoughts of
lust, thoughts of hatred, thoughts of delusion. Why do I say so? 

Because, monks, these thoughts are not concerned with profit, they are
not the rudiments of the holy life, they conduce not to revulsion, to
dispassion, to cessation, to tranquillity, to full understanding, to
the perfect wisdom, they conduce not to nibbāna.

When you do think, monks, you should think thus: This is dukkha. This
is the arising of dukkha. This is the ceasing of dukkha. This is the
practice that leads to the ceasing of dukkha. Why do I say this? 

Because, monks, these thoughts are concerned with profit, they are
rudiments of the holy life@dots{}they conduce to nibbāna.

Wherefore an effort must be made to realize: This is dukkha. This is
the arising of dukkha. This is the ceasing of dukkha. This is the
practice that leads to the ceasing of dukkha.

@end quotation
 
The ``thinking'' referred to in this sutta is not thinking about the
four noble Truths. It refers to the direct realization of the four
noble Truths which are: dukkha, which is suffering, its origin, which
is craving, its cessation, which is nibbāna, and the way leading to
its cessation, which is the eightfold Path. When there is right
mindfulness of a reality which appears, sammā-saṅkappa ``touches'' it
and then paññā can investigate its characteristic in order to know it
as it is. This is the way to eventually realize the four noble Truths.
At the moment of enlightenment the four noble Truths are penetrated.
When the citta is lokuttara citta, sammā-saṅkappa is also lokuttara.
It ``touches'' nibbāna. 

@subsection Questions 
@enumerate 

@item
Through how many doors
can vitakka and vicāra experience an object? 

@item
Can vitakka and
vicāra think of paramattha dhammas? 

@item
What is the difference
between vitakka and vicāra? 

@item
Do vitakka and vicāra always arise
together? 

@item
Can vitakka and vicāra arise in a sense-door process?

@item
Which types of kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the sense-sphere)
are not accompanied by vitakka and vicāra? 

@item
In which stages of
jhāna does vitakka arise? 

@item
Why is vitakka abandoned in the
higher stages of jhāna? 

@item
In which stages of jhāna does vicāra
arise? 

@item
Both vitakka and vicāra accompany the citta which is
mindful of nāma and rūpa. Are both vitakka and vicāra factors of the
eightfold Path? @end enumerate

@node Determination and Energy
@chapter Determination and Energy

@section Determination (adhimokkha) 

Adhimokkha, determination or resolution, is another cetasika among the
six ``particulars'' which arises with cittas of the four jātis but not
with every citta. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} ( XIV, 151) gives the following definition of
adhimokkha:

The act of resolving is resolution. It has the characteristic of
conviction. Its function is not to grope. It is manifested as
decisiveness. Its proximate cause is a thing to be convinced about. It
should be regarded as like a boundary-post owing to its immovableness
with regard to the object.

The ``Paramattha Mañjūsā'' (489), the commentary to the
@emph{Visuddhimagga}, states that:

@quotation

`` the act of resolving should be understood as the act of being
convinced about an object''. 

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 133) gives a definition
similar to the one of the @emph{Visuddhimagga}@footnote{The
Dhammasangaṇi does not mention adhimokkha in its list of dhammas, but
it adds: ``or whatever other factors there are'' (par1). The
Atthasālinī and the Visuddhimagga classify adhimokkha among the nine
``whatsoevers'' (ye vā panaka). Manasikāra is also classified among
the ``whatsoevers''. Manasikāra and adhimokkha are mentioned in the
``Discourse on the Uninterrupted'' (Middle Length Sayings III, no.
111). See Abhidhamma Studies by Ven. Nyanaponika, in Chapter 4, p.
49, and in his Appendix. B.P.S. Kandy, 1976.}

Adhimokkha is not the same as what we usually mean by the words
``determination'' and ``decision'' in conventional language. In order
to understand the characteristic of adhimokkha we should know which
types of citta it accompanies. 

Since adhimokkha is one of the ``particulars'' it accompanies cittas
of the four jātis and thus it can be kusala, akusala, vipāka or
kiriya. As we have seen, the ``particulars'' do not arise with every
citta. Adhimokkha does not accompany the dvi-pañcaviññāṇas
(sense-cognitions) which are accompanied only by the ``universals'',
not by other types of cetasikas. Seeing-consciousness, for example,
arises at the eye-base and sees visible object. It does not need,
apart from the seven ``universals'', adhimokkha or any other cetasika
in order to see visible object. 

Adhimokkha does not arise either with the type of moha-mūla-citta
(citta rooted in ignorance) which is @emph{accompanied by doubt
(vicikicchā).} When there is doubt there cannot be at the same time
the cetasika adhimokkha which ``does not grope'' and is ``convinced''
about the object. 

Adhimokkha accompanies all cittas other than the afore-mentioned
cittas. It arises in the sense-door process as well as in the
mind-door process. Adhimokkha is one among the cetasikas which assist
citta in cognizing its object. Adhimokkha also accompanies the cittas
which do not arise in a process: the paṭisandhi-citta, the
bhavanga-citta and the cuti-citta. It is ``convinced'' about the
object these cittas experience.

When we hear the word ``decision'' or ``determination'', we usually
associate this word with a decision we have to consider carefully. We
may not have expected adhimokkha to arise in a sense-door process,
but, as we have seen, it arises in sense-door processes as well as in
mind-door processes and it assists the citta in cognizing the object. 

Adhimokkha which accompanies akusala citta is determination which is
akusala. When one, for example, speaks harshly or hits someone else,
there is akusala adhimokkha which is convinced about the object of
aversion. Adhimokkha which accompanies kusala citta is determination
which is kusala. When one, for example, decides with kusala citta to
study the Dhamma, kusala adhimokkha accompanies the kusala citta.
However, at such a moment there are also many other wholesome
cetasikas accompanying the kusala citta and adhimokkha is only one of
them. It is difficult to know exactly what adhimokkha is. There is,
for example, kusala cetanā which ``wills'' kusala, there is
non-attachment, alobha, and there are many other cetasikas which each
have their own task in assisting the citta to perform its function.
They all take part in `` deciding'' to study the Dhamma. 

When one develops calm there is adhimokkha which is determined, sure
about the object, which is in this case an object of samatha. When
jhāna is attained adhimokkha accompanies the jhāna-citta and it
performs its function of being determined as to the object of
absorption.

When one develops right understanding of nāma and rūpa, there is
adhimokkha accompanying the kusala citta. We may believe that
@emph{we} can decide to make sati arise, but there is @emph{no self}
who can decide this. When there are the appropriate conditions for
sati and paññā they arise and then there is also adhimokkha which
performs its function while it accompanies the kusala citta. When one
begins to develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa, there will be
doubt as to their different characteristics. When there is doubt
adhimokkha does not arise. When there is right mindfulness of the nāma
or rūpa which appears, adhimokkha performs its function of being
``convinced'', sure about the object. 

Adhimokkha which accompanies lokuttara citta is ``convinced'', sure
about the object which is nibbāna. 

Adhimokkha is not self; it is saṅkhāra dhamma, a conditioned dhamma
which arises and falls away with the citta it accompanies. It performs
its function only while it is accompanying the citta and then it falls
away together with the citta. If the next citta is accompanied by
adhimokkha it is another adhimokkha and this falls away again. 

Since adhimokkha arises with all cittas except the ten pañca-viññāṇas
and the type of moha-mūla-citta which is accompanied by doubt, it
arises with seventy-eight cittas in all@footnote{When cittas are
counted as 89. Cittas can be counted as 89 or 121. When they are
counted as 121 the lokuttara jhānacittas accompanied by jhāna-factors
of the five stages of jhāna are included.}.

@section Energy (viriya)

Viriya, energy or effort, is another
cetasika among the ``particulars'' which arises with cittas of the
four jātis but not with every citta. The @emph{Visuddhimagga} ( XIV,
137) states concerning viriya:

Energy (viriya) is the state of one who is vigorous (vīra). Its
characteristic is marshalling (driving). Its function is to
consolidate conascent states (the accompanying citta and cetasikas).
It is manifested as non-collapse. Because of the words ``Bestirred, he
strives wisely'' (@emph{Gradual Sayings} II, 115), its proximate cause
is a sense of urgency; or its proximate cause is grounds for the
initiation of energy. When rightly initiated, it should be regarded as
the root of all attainments.

Viriya which is the root of all attainments is right effort, viriya
accompanying kusala citta. Since viriya accompanies cittas of the four
jātis, there is also akusala viriya, viriya accompanying vipākacitta
and viriya accompanying kiriyacitta. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 120,121) gives a
definition of viriya which is similar to the one given by the
@emph{Visuddhimagga.} Apart from this definition it gives first
another one and here it deals with viriya under the aspect of
``controlling faculty'' or @emph{indriya}. The Pāli term ``indriya''
means ``governing or ruling principle''. When kusala viriya has been
developed it becomes a ``controlling faculty''. The controlling
faculty of viriya ``controls'' or inhibits laziness, a defilement
opposed to energy@footnote{See Dhammasangaṇi par13, and for its
explanation: Atthasālinī I, Part IV, Chapter 2, 146. There are five
indriyas which should be developed together. They are the ``spiritual
faculties'' which are the following wholesome qualities: saddhā
(confidence), viriya, sati, samādhi (concentration) and paññā. These
faculties control or overcome the defilements which are their
opposites. When indriyas have been developed to the degree that they
are ``unshakable'', they are ``powers'' or ``strengths'', balas.
Powers cannot be shaken by the defilements which are their opposites.
}. We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī}: 

@quotation

From its overcoming idleness it is a controlling faculty in the sense
of predominance @dots{}Its characteristic is strengthening, and grasp
or support. As an old house stands when strengthened by new pillars,
so the aspirant (meditator), when strengthened by energy, does not
fall off or deteriorate as to moral states. Thus should the
characteristic of strengthening be understood@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} then uses a simile of a small army which, if it
goes to battle, might be repulsed. However, when they are supported by
a strong reinforcement sent by the king, they can defeat the hostile
army. We read:

@quotation
@dots{}thus energy does not allow associated states to recede, to
retreat; it uplifts, supports them. Hence it has been said that energy
has the characteristic of supporting.

@end quotation

The word ``energy'' as it is used in conventional language does not
render the precise meaning of viriya. When we for example say that we
are full of energy, what do we mean? Energy for what? Is it energy
accompanying akusala citta or energy accompanying kusala citta?
Besides, there are also vipākacittas and kiriyacittas which are
accompanied by viriya. We are inclined to take energy for self, but
energy is saṅkhāra dhamma, a conditioned dhamma. Energy is conditioned
by the citta and the other cetasikas it accompanies and thus there is
a different kind of energy with different cittas. In order to have
more understanding about viriya we should study which types of cittas
it accompanies. 

Viriya accompanies all akusala cittas and all sobhana cittas@footnote{
Sobhana cittas, beautiful cittas, are cittas accompanied by sobhana
cetasikas. They include not only kusala cittas but also vipākacittas
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas and kiriyacittas (of the arahat)
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas. The sobhana cittas of the
sense-sphere, kāmāvacara sobhana cittas, are: mahā-kusala cittas,
mahā-vipākacittas and mahā-kiriyacittas. ``Mahā'' means: ''great''.
Sobhana cittas also include jhānacittas and lokuttara cittas.}
(including jhānacittas and lokuttara cittas), but it does not arise
with all vipākacittas and with all kiriyacittas. Viriya does not
accompany the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas, the sense-cognitions. Seeing or
hearing do not need viriya in order to experience their objects. The
mind-door adverting-consciousness, @emph{mano-dvārāvajjana-citta} and
the @emph{hasituppāda-citta} which causes smiling in the case of
arahats are the only ahetuka cittas (rootless cittas) which are
accompanied by viriya@footnote{For details see Appendix 4.}. 

We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} that the @emph{function of viriya}
is @emph{to consolidate conascent states.} Viriya strengthens,
supports the citta and the other cetasikas it accompanies so that they
can carry out their work and do not ``collapse''. 

Viriya accompanies every kusala citta and it supports the citta and
accompanying cetasikas so that they can carry out their work in a
wholesome way. When there is loving kindness, it is strengthened and
supported by kusala viriya. If there were no viriya accompanying the
kusala citta, no kusala could be performed. Also when the citta is
akusala citta, viriya accompanies the citta and the cetasikas so that
they can carry out their work in the unwholesome way. Viriya
accompanies every akusala citta. When there is anger, dosa, it is
strengthened and supported by viriya. Viriya which accompanies akusala
citta is wrong effort and viriya which accompanies kusala citta is
right effort. 

Kusala viriya can be energy for dāna, for sīla, for samatha or for
vipassanā. It depends on conditions which type of kusala arises at a
particular moment. If one wants, for example, to subdue defilements
through the development of calm and one knows how to develop calm,
there is energy and perseverance with the development of calm. If
one's goal is knowing realities as they are there are conditions for
energy for vipassanā. This kind of energy or effort arises together
with the citta which is mindful of a nāma or rūpa appearing now, at
this moment. Right effort arises because of its own conditions; there
is no self who can exert himself. When we have a notion of self who
has to make an effort to be aware, there is wrong effort instead of
right effort. Right effort is a conditioned dhamma, saṅkhāra dhamma,
which arises because of its own conditions. It does not last, it falls
away immediately with the citta it accompanies and then wrong effort
may arise. 

As we read in the definition of the @emph{Visuddhimagga}, the
proximate cause of viriya is ``a sense of urgency or grounds for the
initiation of energy''. Birth, old age and death can remind us of the
urgency to develop right understanding which eventually will lead to
freedom from the cycle of birth and death. When we are ``urged'' to be
mindful of realities, there is no self who makes an effort to be
mindful. Right effort which is a reality arising because of its own
conditions strengthens and supports the citta with mindfulness. There
is energy, courage and perseverance to develop the eightfold Path
since this is the only way leading to the end of dukkha. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} and the @emph{Atthasālinī}, when they mention
that the proximate cause of viriya is a sense of urgency, quote the
words, ``bestirred, he strives wisely'', from a sutta of the
@emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Fours, Chapter XII, par3, The
Goad). In this sutta we read about four kinds of horses. One horse is
already stirred to activity when he sees the shadow of the goadstick,
whereas another one is not stirred by that, but is only stirred when
his coat is pricked by the goad. Another one is stirred only when his
flesh is pierced by the goad. We read about the fourth kind of horse:

Once more, monks, we may have a goodly thorough-bred steed, which is
stirred, feels agitation neither at the sight of the goadstick nor
when his coat is pricked, nor yet when his flesh is pierced with the
goadstick; but when he is pierced to the very bone he is
stirred@dots{}

We then read about four kinds of people who are compared to these
horses:

@quotation
In this case, monks, here we may have a certain goodly thorough-bred
man who hears it said that in such and such a village or township is a
woman or a man afflicted or dead. Thereat he is stirred, he feels
agitation. Thus agitated he strictly applies himself. Thus applied he
both realizes in his own person the supreme truth, and sees it by
penetrating it with wisdom@dots{}

Again, monks, here we may have a goodly thoroughbred man who does not
hear it said that in such or such a village or township is a woman or
a man afflicted or dead, but with his own eyes sees it. Thereupon he
is stirred@dots{}

Then again, monks, here we may have a certain goodly thorough-bred man
who does not hear it said@dots{}nor yet with his own eyes sees a
woman or man afflicted or dead, but his own kinsman or blood-relation
is afflicted or dead. Thereupon he is stirred@dots{}

Once more, monks, here we may have a goodly thoroughbred man who
neither hears it said@dots{}nor yet with his own eyes sees@dots{}
nor is his own kinsman or blood-relation afflicted or dead, but he
himself is stricken with painful bodily feelings, grievous, sharp,
racking, distracting, discomforting, that drain the life away. Thereat
he is stirred, he feels agitation. Being so stirred he strictly
applies himself. Thus applied he both realizes with his own person the
supreme truth and sees it by penetrating it with wisdom@dots{}

@end quotation

Sickness, old age and death are realities of daily life which can
remind us of the urgency to develop right understanding, they are like
a ``goadstick'' which can ``stir'' us. They are the proximate cause of
right effort, which is energy for mindfulness of the reality appearing
at the present moment. 

Viriya is the ``root of all attainments'', as we read in the
definition by the @emph{Visuddhimagga}. Right effort is an
@emph{indriya}, controlling faculty, which has to be developed
together with the other indriyas for the attainment of jhāna and the
attainment of enlightenment. As the @emph{Atthasālinī} states, viriya
is the indriya which ``controls'' or inhibits laziness. Laziness is
an obstruction to jhāna and to enlightenment. Right effort can also be
seen under the aspect of @emph{path-factor} and as such it is called
@emph{sammā-vāyāma of the eightfold Path.} Right effort has to
accompany right understanding, sammā-diṭṭhi, of the eightfold Path
in order to be a path-factor. Right effort of the eightfold Path
develops through mahā-satipaṭṭhāna, the ``four applications of
mindfulness''. When there is mindfulness of the reality which appears
at the present moment there is also right effort.

Viriya is one of the @emph{factors of enlightenment, bojjhangas.} The
factors of enlightenment are: mindfulness (sati), investigation of the
Dhamma (dhammavicaya, which is paññā), viriya, enthusiasm (pīti), calm
(passaddhi), concentration (samādhi) and equanimity (upekkhā). When
the enlightenment factors have been developed they lead to the
realization of the four noble Truths. The enlightenment factors reach
completion through the development of
mahā-satipaṭṭhāna@footnote{Kindred Sayings V, Mahā-vagga, Kindred
Sayings on the Limbs of Wisdom, Chapter I, par6.}. 

Thus we see that there are different aspects to right effort. We read
in the scriptures about `` four right endeavours'' and these are
aspects of right effort. We read for example in the @emph{Middle
Length Sayings} (III, 141, the Analysis of the Truths) that Sāriputta
explained to the monks the four noble Truths. He spoke about dukkha,
its origination, its cessation and the way leading to its cessation ,
the eightfold Path. He explained about right effort, one of the
factors of the eightfold Path, that there are four right endeavours:

@quotation

And what, your reverences, is right endeavour? As to this, your
reverences, a monk generates desire, endeavours, stirs up energy,
exerts his mind and strives for the non-arising of evil unskilled
states that have not arisen@dots{}for the getting rid of evil
unskilled states that have arisen@dots{}for the arising of skilled
states that have not arisen@dots{}for the maintenance, preservation,
increase, maturity, development and completion of skilled states that
have arisen. This, your reverences, is called right endeavour.

@end quotation

When there is mindfulness of visible object which appears now, seeing
which appears now, sound which appears now, hearing which appears now,
or any other reality which appears now, right understanding of the
eightfold Path is being developed and this is the most effective way
to avoid akusala, to overcome it, to make kusala arise and to maintain
kusala and bring it to perfection. At the moment of right mindfulness
right effort performs its task of strengthening the kusala citta so
that there is perseverance with the development of the eightfold Path. 

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Which cittas are not accompanied by
adhimokkha? 

@item
Can adhimokkha arise in a sense-door process?

@item
Can viriya be akusala? 

@item
Viriya is saṅkhāra dhamma. Why did
the Buddha exhort people to strive for wisdom although there is no
self who can put forth energy? 

@item
What is right effort of the
eightfold Path? 

@item
Which are the proximate causes for right
effort? 

@item
How can right effort of the eightfold Path be
developed? 

@item
At which moment is right effort of the eightfold
Path be developed? 

@item
What is the object which right effort of the
eightfold Path experiences? @end enumerate

@node Right Effort of the eightfold Path
@chapter Right Effort of the eightfold Path


As we have seen in chapter 9, there are several aspects to kusala
viriya, right effort. It is a @emph{factor of the eightfold Path} when
it accompanies right understanding and right mindfulness of the
eightfold Path and as such it is called @emph{sammā-vāyāma}. This type
of effort or energy is not energy for mindfulness in the future, but
energy for mindfulness right now. When there is right mindfulness of
any characteristic which appears right now, there is also right effort
accompanying the citta at that moment.

We may find that mindfulness does not arise very often. It seems that
we lack a true ``sense of urgency'', which is according to the
@emph{Atthasālinī} and the @emph{Visuddhimagga} the proximate cause of
right effort. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} ( IV, 63) explains how there can be a greater
sense of urgency and how the mind should be encouraged. We read:

How does he encourage the mind on an occasion when it should be
encouraged? When his mind is listless owing to sluggishness in the
exercise of understanding or to failure to attain the bliss of peace,
then he should stimulate it by reviewing the eight grounds for a sense
of urgency. These are the four, namely, birth, ageing, sickness and
death, with the suffering of the states of loss as the fifth, and also
the suffering in the past rooted in the round (of rebirth), the
suffering in the future rooted in the round (of rebirth), and the
suffering in the present rooted in the search for nutriment. And he
creates confidence by recollecting the special qualities of the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. This is how he encourages the mind
on an occasion when it should be encouraged.

The ``states of loss'' mentioned by the @emph{Visuddhimagga} are the
rebirths which are ``removed from the happy destiny'' (XIX, 92, 93),
they are rebirth in the animal world, in the ``ghost world'', in the
world of demons (asuras) or in hell planes. 

Mindfulness right now can eventually lead to freedom from the danger
of rebirth. We may think with fear of unhappy rebirth and then there
is akusala citta with dosa, not mindfulness. However, we should
remember that even fear can be object of mindfulness. Shortly after
the dosa-mūla-citta has fallen away sati may arise and it can be aware
of whatever characteristic appears at that moment, no matter it is an
unpleasant object or akusala citta. When there is mindfulness there is
also right effort.

We may think time and again of the urgency of mindfulness, but in spite
of that we can notice that sati very seldom arises. We are impatient
and we find it difficult to persevere with the development of
satipaṭṭhāna. The suttas mention several factors which hinder
``exertion, application, striving''. We read in the @emph{Gradual
Sayings} (Book of the Tens, Chapter II, par4, Obstruction) about five
mental obstructions which cause wholesome qualities to decline:

@quotation

Herein a monk has doubts and waverings about the Teacher. He is not
drawn to him, he is not sure about him@enddots{} 

Again, monks, a monk has doubts about the Dhamma, about the Sangha (
the Order of monks), about the training@dots{}he is vexed with his
comrades in the brahma-life, displeased, troubled in mind, come to a
stop. In a monk who is thus, his mind inclines not to exertion, to
application, to perseverance, to striving@dots{}

@end quotation

We may doubt whether there can be an ``ariyan Sangha'', people who
have developed the eightfold Path and attained enlightenment. We may
have doubts about the usefulness of sati right now, of mindfulness of
visible object, sound or any other reality which appears. At the
moment of doubt there cannot be right effort.

There will be less doubt and more confidence if we listen to the
Dhamma as it is explained by the right person, if we read the
scriptures, if we consider what we learnt and test the meaning of it
ourselves. We can prove the truth of what we learnt by the application
of the Dhamma in daily life.

The above-quoted sutta also mentions five ``bondages of the heart''
which hinder the development of good qualities:

@quotation
@dots{}Herein a monk is not dispassionate in things sensual; desire,
affections, thirsting, distress and craving have not gone from
him@dots{}

Again in body a monk is not dispassionate; he is not dispassionate in
the matter of material shapes; having eaten his bellyful he lives
given to the pleasure of lying down on back or side, a prey to torpor;
or he leads the brahma-life with a view to join some order of devas,
with the thought: By virtue of this way of life or practice or
austerity or brahma-life I shall become some deva or other. Whatsoever
monk @dots{}has such an object in view, his mind inclines not to
exertion, to application, to perseverance and striving@dots{}

@end quotation

We are infatuated by all the pleasant things of life. At such moments
we forget to develop satipaṭṭhāna. We read in the same sutta that in
the monk who has abandoned the mental obstructions and the ``bondages
of the heart'', ``growth, not decline, in good states may be looked
for.'' However, we should realize that not all obstructions can be
overcome at once. Even the sotāpanna who has eradicated doubt and who
has an unshakable confidence in the Triple Gem is still attached to
sense-pleasures. But he has no wrong view, he does not take attachment
or any other reality for self. He has developed right understanding of
all realities, also of akusala dhammas, by being aware of them when
they appear. The sotāpanna cannot deviate from the eightfold Path
anymore. Since he has realized the truth that all conditioned
realities are impermanent and dukkha, his urgency to be freed from
dukkha does not stem from theoretical understanding of the truth of
dukkha, but from the direct realization of the truth of dukkha. He has
a true sense of urgency which makes him persevere with the development
of the eightfold Path. 

When one has just started to develop satipaṭṭhāna, sati does not often
arise. One may wonder how many years it will take before there can be
any progress. When we think of the goal with desire or when we are
afraid of failure there is akusala citta. We may not notice that there
is any progress, but even if there is sometimes one moment of
mindfulness of a reality appearing through one of the six doors, right
understanding can develop little by little. Sati which arises falls
away, but it is never lost, it conditions the arising again of sati
later on. Instead of having desire for enlightenment we should see the
value of right understanding at this moment. 

When sati arises it is accompanied by kusala viriya, right effort,
which performs its function of strengthening and supporting citta and
the accompanying cetasikas, and in that way there can be perseverance
to develop right understanding. It takes great patience and courage,
even heroic fortitude, to persevere with mindfulness of all kinds of
realities which appear, also of akusala dhammas we would rather shun
as object of mindfulness. 

Right understanding cannot be developed within a short time. The
Buddha, when he was still a Bodhisatta, had to develop wisdom for
aeons. He developed satipaṭṭhāna with great patience and an unshakable
energy. Energy was one of the ``perfections'' he developed together
with satipaṭṭhāna. He was willing to struggle and strive for an
extremely long time, without becoming disenchanted with all the
hardship and suffering he had to endure, all for the sake of the
welfare of other beings.

The @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par13), in its description of the ``faculty
(indriya) of energy'', speaks about ``zeal and ardour, vigour and
fortitude, the state of unfaltering effort'', ``the state of
unflinching endurance and solid grip of the burden.'' The Bodhisatta,
when he in his last life was sitting under the Bodhi-tree, had
unflinching endurance, he did not let go of the task he had to fulfil.
His vigour and fortitude were unsurpassed. We read in the
@emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Twos, Chapter I, par5) that the
Buddha said to the monks that he did not shrink back from the struggle
and struggled on thus:

@quotation

``Gladly would I have my skin and sinews and bones wither and my
body's flesh and blood dry up, if only I may hold out until I win what
may be won by human strength, by human energy, by human striving''. By
my earnest endeavour, monks, I won enlightenment, I won the unrivalled
freedom from the bond.

@end quotation

Many of the Buddha's disciples developed the eightfold Path and
attained enlightenment as well. However, they also had to accumulate
right understanding during countless lives in order to attain
enlightenment. When we read about the lives of the Buddha's disciples
in the @emph{Thera-therī-gāthā} (Psalms of the Brothers and Sisters)
we see that they also, like we, had periods of slackness with regard
to the development of satipaṭṭhāna. However, ordinary events in their
daily lives could stir them and remind them of the urgency to develop
right understanding. 

We read that the Thera Uttiya (Thera-gāthā 30) had no purity of sīla
and could not attain enlightenment. The Buddha taught him in brief the
purification of sīla and the purification of view@footnote{See
Kindred Sayings V, Kindred Sayings on the Applications of Mindfulness,
Chapter I, par3,5,6.} . Uttiya developed insight and then he became
ill. The Commentary to the ``Thera-gāthā'' ( the Paramatthadīpanī)
relates: ``In his anxiety he put forth every effort and attained
arahatship''. He spoke the following verse with reference to the event
which stirred him to continue to develop insight until he had reached
the goal:

@example

Since sickness has befallen me, O now
Let there arise in me true mindfulness.
Sickness has now befallen me--'t is time
For me no more to dally or delay.

@end example

Sickness can remind us that we are not master of our body. What we
take for ``our body'' and for ``our mind'' are only conditioned rūpas
and nāmas which are beyond control. If we merely @emph{think} of nāma
and rūpa we will not know them as they are. Mindfulness of the reality
which appears now is the only way to eventually know the true nature
of realities.

The Buddha knew the accumulations of beings and thus whenever he
preached to someone he could remind him in the way which was most
suitable for him. He often reminded people of the foulness of ``this
short-lived body'', in order to stir them to develop satipaṭṭhāna. The
Thera Kimbila (Thera-gāthā 118) was stirred when the Buddha, by his
supernatural power, conjured up the image of a beautiful woman and
showed her passing to old age. The Commentary relates that he was
greatly shaken by this image. He spoke this verse:

@example

As bidden by some power age over her falls. 
Her shape is as another, yet the same.
Now this myself, who never has left myself,
Seems other than the self I recollect.

@end example

Kimbila realized that what he took for self are ever-changing
phenomena. Although what we call in conventional terms the ``present
personality'' has developed from the ``past personality'', there isn't
any reality which is self. The phenomena of the present moment fall
away immediately as soon as they have arisen and are completely gone.
The commentary relates that Kimbila, while he considered the truth of
impermanence, was yet more strongly agitated. He listened to the
Buddha, became a monk and attained arahatship.

There are time and again signs of foulness and decay in our body. Our
body is susceptible to decay, and death can come at any moment. We do
not know when the last citta of our life, the dying-consciousness,
will arise. For those who have accumulated conditions for sati the
thought of death can remind them to be aware. 

We read that the Buddha's disciples, when they were stirred by an
event in their life, ``put forth energy and strove with passionate
ardour''. We read, for example, in the ``Therīgāthā (29) that Sāmā
could not find peace of mind during the twenty five years she was a
nun. In her old age she heard a sermon of the Buddha which stirred
her, and she attained arahatship. We read that she said: ``To free my
path from all that causes dukkha, I strove with passionate ardour, and
I won!'' When we read these words we may misunderstand them. We are so
used to thinking of effort as effort exerted by a self that we can
hardly imagine how there can be effort arising because of its own
conditions. Realities appear already through the five senses and
through the mind-door. Visible object, for example, appears time and
again. We could begin to investigate its characteristic until it is
realized as @emph{just visible object appearing through eyesense, not
something or somebody.} There can be striving without the concept of
self who strives.

Even though we are only starting to develop the Path events in our
life can remind us to be aware now, just as they reminded the Buddha's
disciples. At times we may have doubts about the benefit of sati, or
it may happen that we are absorbed by our work or our circle of
friends, or we may be infatuated by all the pleasant things of life,
without mindfulness of such moments. Although we know in theory that
any reality can be object of mindfulness, there may be a long period
of sluggishness in our life. However, a painful event such as the loss
of someone who is dear to us may remind us of the true nature of
reality; this can become our ``goad'' which stirs us. If we truly see
that even one moment of right understanding is beneficial we will have
courage to continue with the development of satipaṭṭhāna and then
there is right effort which arises because of its own conditions. We
can come to understand that life without the development of right
understanding is utterly meaningless.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
What can obstruct right effort? 

@item
When we
are thinking of the goal with discouragement, what can be done to
persevere? 

@item
How can signs of foulness and decay in the body be
reminders of awareness of the present reality? 

@item
Why is listening
to the Dhamma as it is explained by the right person helpful for the
arising of sati? @end enumerate

@node Enthusiasm
@chapter Enthusiasm

@section Enthusiasm (pīti)

Pīti, translated as enthusiasm, zest or rapture, is another cetasika
among the six ``particulars'' which arise with cittas of the four
jātis but not with every citta. Pīti can be kusala, akusala, vipāka
or kiriya.

When we think of enthusiasm we presume that it is always kusala. We
praise people who are enthusiastic. However, when we study the
Abhidhamma we learn that enthusiasm is not always kusala, that it
arises also with akusala cittas. There are many more akusala cittas in
our life than kusala cittas and thus, when there is enthusiasm it is
more often akusala than kusala. Don't we often take for kusala what is
in fact akusala ? Through the study of the Abhidhamma we will have
more understanding of kusala and akusala and of the different
conditions for their arising.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV, 94) gives the following definition of
pīti:

@quotation
@dots{}It refreshes (pīṇayati, gladdens, satisfies), thus it is
happiness (pīti)@footnote{Pīṇayati is the causative of pīṇeti which
means: to gladden, please, satisfy or invigorate.}. It has the
characteristic of satisfaction@footnote{The English translation uses
here: endearment.} (sampiyāna). Its function is to refresh the body
and the mind; or its function is to pervade (thrill with rapture). It
is manifested as elation@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} ( I, Part IV, Chapter 1, 115) gives a similar
definition of pīti@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi par9.} . 

@quotation

Pīti takes an interest in the object which citta cognizes and which is
also experienced by the accompanying cetasikas. It is satisfied,
delighted with the object and it ``refreshes'' citta and the
accompanying cetasikas.

@end quotation

In the case of the kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the sense-sphere) pīti
arises with the cittas which are @emph{accompanied by pleasant
feeling} (somanassa). Thus, whenever there is somanassa, there is also
pīti. Pīti is not the same as pleasant feeling, its characteristic and
function are different. Pīti is not feeling, vedanākkhandha, but
@emph{saṅkhārakkhandha} (the khandha which includes all cetasikas
except vedanā and saññā).

Pleasant feeling experiences the flavour of the object, its function
is to exploit in one way or other the desirable aspect of the object
(Vis. XIV, 128). Pīti does not feel, its characteristic is, as we
have seen, satisfaction and its function is refreshing or invigorating
body and mind, or to pervade them with rapture. Pīti takes an interest
in the object and is delighted with it, it has its own specific
function while it assists the citta; its function is different from
the function of feeling. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV, 100) explains in the section on the
first jhāna the difference between pleasant feeling (sukha, translated
here as ``bliss'') and pīti (translated here as ``happiness'') which
are both jhāna-factors. We read:

@quotation
And whenever the two are associated, happiness (pīti) is the
contentedness at getting a desirable object, and bliss (sukha) is the
actual experience of it when got. Where there is happiness there is
bliss; but where there is bliss there is not necessarily
happiness@footnote{This is in the case of the rūpāvacara cittas of the
fourth stage of jhāna (of the five-fold system), which are accompanied
by happy feeling, sukha, but not by pīti.}. Happiness is included in
the saṅkhārakkhandha; bliss is included in the vedanākkhandha. If a
man exhausted in a desert saw or heard about a pond on the edge of a
wood, he would have happiness; if he went into the wood's shade and
used the water, he would have bliss@dots{}

@end quotation

The different words which are used to describe pleasant feeling and
enthusiasm and also the above-quoted simile can help us to have
theoretical knowledge of these two realities. If there is mindfulness
of realities when they appear, a more precise understanding of their
characteristics can be developed. However, we should not try to
``catch'' particular realities, it depends on conditions of which
reality sati is aware.

As we have seen, in the case of the kāmāvacara cittas, pīti arises
with the cittas which are accompanied by pleasant feeling. Whenever
there is interest in the object and delight with it there is also
pleasant feeling; in such cases there cannot be indifferent feeling or
unpleasant feeling.

In the case of akusala cittas, pīti arises with the types of
lobha-mūla-cittas which are accompanied by pleasant feeling@footnote{
See Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 4.}. When the lobha-mūla-citta
is accompanied by pleasant feeling, the lobha is more intense than
when it is accompanied by indifferent feeling. Pīti which arises
together with lobha-mūla-citta accompanied by pleasant feeling takes
an interest in the desirable object, it is delighted, thrilled with
it. For example, when we have thoroughly enjoyed listening to
beautiful music we may applaud with great enthusiasm. When we admire a
musician, a painter or a famous sportsman, there may be many moments
of lobha-mūla-citta with pīti. Whenever we are attached to an object
with pleasant feeling, there is also pīti. The object may be a
pleasant sight, a beautiful sound, a fragrant odour, a delicious
flavour, a pleasant tangible object or an agreeable object experienced
through the mind-door. There are many moments of akusala pīti we are
not aware of.

Pīti does not arise with dosa-mūla-citta. When dosa-mūla-citta arises,
the citta dislikes the object and then there cannot be at the same
time a pleasurable interest. Pīti does not arise either with
moha-mūla-citta; at the moment of moha-mūla-citta there is no
enthusiasm.

As regards ahetuka cittas@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily Life,
Chapter 8 and 9. There are eighteen types of ahetuka cittas, cittas
without akusala hetus or sobhana hetus, ``roots''. They are the
sense-door-adverting-consciousness, the ``five pairs'' of
sense-cognitions (seeing, hearing, etc.), two types of
receiving-consciousness, three types of investigating-consciousness,
the mind-door-adverting-consciousness and the smile-producing
consciousness of the arahat.}, only the two types which are
accompanied by pleasant feeling arise with pīti: one type of
santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka and investigates an
extraordinarily pleasant object@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life,
Chapter 13.} and the hasituppāda-citta, the smile-producing
consciousness of the arahat@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter
9.}.

When there is seeing, which is one of the dvi-pañcaviññāṇas
(sense-cognitions), there is no delight or enthusiasm about visible
object, seeing merely sees it. If visible object is an extraordinarily
pleasant object, the santīraṇa-citta in that process which
investigates visible object is accompanied by pleasant feeling and
pīti. The javana-cittas of that process may or may not be accompanied
by pīti. If they are accompanied by pleasant feeling they are also
accompanied by pīti.

As regards the @emph{kāmāvacara sobhana cittas} (beautiful cittas of
the sense-sphere), only the types of citta which are accompanied by
pleasant feeling arise with pīti. When we, with generosity and full of
joy, help someone else, the kusala citta is accompanied by pleasant
feeling and also by pīti which invigorates body and mind. Even if
there was tiredness before, it is gone; one is refreshed. The same may
happen when one reads a sutta with kusala citta accompanied by joy and
enthusiasm. At such a moment one is not bored or tired, there is pīti
which takes a pleasurable interest in the object. 

Sometimes we are full of joy and enthusiasm while we help others,
while we give something away or while we are performing other ways of
kusala, but it is not always possible to have joy and enthusiasm at
such moments. There are also moments of kusala citta accompanied by
indifferent feeling, upekkhā, and then there is no pīti. It depends on
conditions whether pīti arises or not. When one has great confidence
in kusala and sees the benefit of it there are conditions for the
arising of joy and enthusiasm while applying oneself to it. When
kusala citta with pleasant feeling arises the accompanying pīti
invigorates the citta and the other cetasikas. Viriya, for example, is
intensified by pīti. We may be able to notice that, when there is joy
and enthusiasm for kusala, we also have more energy to perform it. 

There is another aspect of pīti: it can become an @emph{enlightenment
factor}. The other enlightenment factors are, as we have seen,
mindfulness, investigation of the Dhamma (dhamma vicaya), energy
(viriya), calm (passaddhi), concentration (samādhi) and equanimity
(upekkhā)@footnote{See Chapter 9, Viriya.} . When the enlightenment
factors have been developed through satipaṭṭhāna, they lead to the
realization of the four noble Truths. When we have just started to be
mindful of nāma and rūpa, we cannot expect the enlightenment factors
to be developed yet. They will develop through satipaṭṭhāna. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (75) mentions the following factors which are
conducive to the arising of the enlightenment factor of pīti:

@quotation
@dots{}recollection of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, of
sīla, of generosity, of devas, of peace (nibbāna), avoidance of rough
(i.e. ill-tempered persons), serving meek persons, reflection on a
Suttanta which instills confidence and a tendency to all this.

@end quotation

When we read a sutta, ponder over it and test the meaning by being
mindful of the realities the Buddha taught time and again, we can
prove the truth of his teachings. Thus our confidence in the Buddha,
the Dhamma and the Sangha can grow and we will be inspired to continue
to develop the eightfold Path. There can be conditions for the arising
of enthusiasm which invigorates citta and the accompanying cetasikas.
Also pīti can be object of mindfulness so that paññā can see it as it
is, as not self. We should remember that without the development of
satipaṭṭhāna the enlightenment factor of pīti and also the other
enlightenment factors cannot develop. 

We read in the ``Mahānāma-sutta'' (@emph{Gradual Sayings}, Book of the
Sixes, Chapter I, par10) that the Buddha recommended Mahānāma to
recollect the Buddha, the Dhamma, the Sangha, sīla, generosity and
devas (their good qualities). According to the @emph{Visuddhimagga}
Mahānāma was a sotāpanna, thus, he had right understanding of nāma and
rūpa and he did not take any reality for self. We read: 

@quotation
@dots{}Mahānāma, what time the ariyan disciple minds the Tathāgata,
his heart is never overwhelmed by passion, never overwhelmed by
hatred, never overwhelmed by delusion; then, verily, is the way of his
heart made straight because of the Tathāgata. And with his heart's
ways straightened, Mahānāma, the ariyan disciple becomes zealous of
the goal, zealous of Dhamma, wins the joy that is linked to Dhamma;
and of his joy zest (pīti) is born; when his mind is rapt in zest, his
whole being becomes calm; calm in being, he experiences ease; and of
him who dwells at ease the heart is composed.

Mahānāma, of this ariyan disciple it is said: Among uneven folk he
lives evenly; among troubled folk he lives untroubled; with the ear
for Dhamma won, he makes become the ever minding of the Buddha.

@end quotation

The same is said with regard to the other recollections. According to
the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (VII, 121) only the ariyan disciple can
cultivate the above mentioned subjects with success, since the
non-ariyan cannot really fathom the meaning of these subjects. If one
has not attained enlightenment, how could one know what it means to be
enlightened and how could one clearly understand the meaning of
``Buddha''? Nevertheless, also the non-ariyan can think of the Buddha
with confidence and then pīti may arise as well.

We cannot induce the arising of kusala pīti, it can only arise because
of its own conditions. Shortly after kusala pīti has arisen and fallen
away, attachment is bound to arise. We may feel very satisfied about
``our kusala'' and we may find it very important to have pīti. We may
think that it can last, but in reality it falls away immediately. It
is essential to realize the difference between kusala citta and
akusala citta; thus we will see that there are not kusala cittas all
the time, even when we think that we are performing kusala. We may
expect pleasant things from other people, we like to be praised by
them, we want to show others our good qualities and our knowledge, or
we are attached to the company of people. Defilements are so deeply
rooted and they arise whenever there is an opportunity for their
arising. There are many objects which can condition lobha and lobha
can be accompanied by somanassa and pīti. Enthusiasm which is
unwholesome can arise very shortly after enthusiasm which is wholesome
and it is hard to know their difference. We may find it discouraging
to discover that there are many more akusala cittas than kusala
cittas, but at the moment of knowing akusala citta as it is there is
right understanding. At such a moment the citta is kusala citta and
there is no aversion nor feeling of discouragement.

Not only mahā-kusala cittas, kusala cittas of the sense-sphere, which
are accompanied by somanassa arise with pīti, but also the
mahā-vipākacittas and the mahā-kiriyacittas which are accompanied by
somanassa arise with pīti. As regards mahā-vipākacittas, these are
produced by kamma, and thus it depends on the kamma which produces the
mahā-vipākacitta whether it is accompanied by somanassa and pīti or
not. Among those who are reborn with mahā-vipākacitta, some are born
with somanassa and pīti, others with upekkhā and in that case there is
no pīti. If one is born with somanassa and pīti, all bhavanga-cittas
of that life and also the cuti-citta (dying-consciousness) are
accompanied by somanassa and pīti as well@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily
Life, Chapter 11. If the function of paṭisandhi is performed by an
ahetuka vipākacitta (santīraṇa-citta accompanied by upekkhā which can
be kusala vipāka or akusala vipāka), pīti does not accompany the
citta.}. 

Pīti has many intensities. The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV, 94) and the
@emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter 1, 115,116) explain that there
are @emph{five kinds of pīti.} We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga}: 

@quotation
@dots{}But it is of five kinds as minor happiness, momentary
happiness, showering happiness, uplifting happiness, and pervading
(rapturous) happiness. 

Herein, minor happiness is only able to raise the hairs on the body.
Momentary happiness is like flashes of lightning at different moments.
Showering happiness breaks over the body again and again like waves on
the sea shore.

Uplifting happiness can be powerful enough to levitate the body and
make it spring into the air@dots{}

But when pervading (rapturous happiness) arises, the whole body is
completely pervaded, like a filled bladder, like a rock cavern invaded
by a huge inundation (IV, 98). 

@end quotation

Pīti is able to condition bodily phenomena. The ``uplifting
happiness'' which is the fourth kind of pīti can even levitate the
body. One example given by the @emph{Visuddhimagga} and the
@emph{Atthasālinī} is the case of a young woman whose parents did not
allow her to go to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma. She looked
at the shrine which was lit by moonlight, saw people worshipping and
circumambulating the shrine and heard the chanting. Then ``uplifting
happiness'' made her jump into the air and arrive at the monastery
before her parents. 

In the case of kāmāvacara cittas, pīti always arises together with
somanassa. In the case of the jhāna-cittas, this is not always so.
Pīti is one of the @emph{jhāna-factors} which are developed in samatha
in order to inhibit the hindrances@footnote{The other jhāna-factors
are: vitakka, vicāra, sukha (happy feeling) and samādhi.}. Pīti
inhibits the hindrance which is ill-will (vyāpāda). When there is
delight in a meditation subject there is no ill-will or boredom. As we
just read, there are five kinds of pīti with different intensities.
The fifth kind of pīti, the ``pervading happiness'', which has the
greatest intensity, is the ``root of absorption'' and ``comes by
growth into association with absorption'' (Vis. IV, 99).

At the first stage of rūpa-jhāna all five jhāna-factors arise with the
jhānacitta. At each of the higher stages of jhāna the jhānacitta
becomes more refined and more tranquil, and the jhāna-factors are
successively abandoned. At the second stage (of the five-fold system)
vitakka is abandoned and at the third stage vicāra. At that stage
there are three jhāna-factors remaining: pīti, happy feeling (sukha)
and concentration (samādhi). At the fourth stage pīti has been
abandoned but happy feeling still arises. In the case of the
kāmāvacara cittas, pīti arises whenever there is pleasant feeling, but
this is not so in the case of the jhāna-citta of the fourth stage of
jhāna. The jhānacitta without pīti is more tranquil, more refined. The
kind of pīti which has been abandoned at this stage is the ``pervading
happiness'' which is of the highest intensity. The person who has
experienced this kind of pīti and is able to forego it is worthy of
praise as stated by the @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part V, Chapters 111,
175). 

At the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna (the fourth of the four-fold system
and the fifth of the five-fold system) the jhāna-factor of sukha has
been abandoned and pīti does not arise either at this stage. As
regards arūpāvacara cittas, they are of the same type as the
rūpāvacara cittas of the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna, and thus they
are not accompanied by pīti. As regards lokuttara cittas, they are not
always accompanied by pīti, this depends on different
conditions@footnote{See Atthasālinī II, Part VIII, Chapter I, 228, and
Vis. XXI, 112. For details on cittas accompanied by pīti, see Appendix
5.} .

There are many different kinds of pīti as it accompanies different
types of citta. The pīti which accompanies lobha-mūla-citta is
entirely different from the pīti which accompanies kusala citta. The
pīti which accompanies jhānacitta is again very different. As we have
seen, the ``pervading happiness'', the fifth kind of pīti which is of
the highest degree, is the ``root of absorption''. Pīti which is an
enlightenment factor and which develops through mindfulness of nāma
and rūpa is different again from all other kinds. We read in the
@emph{Kindred Sayings (IV}, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Part II, Kindred
Sayings about Feeling, Chapter III, par29, Purified and free from
carnal taint) about ``zest'', pīti, that is carnal, pīti that is not
carnal and pīti that is still less carnal: 

@quotation

And what, monks, is the zest that is carnal?

There are five sensual elements, monks. What five? Objects cognizable
by the eye, objects desirable, pleasant, delightful and dear,
passion-fraught, inciting to lust@dots{}There are objects cognizable
by the ear@dots{}the nose@dots{}the tongue@dots{}There are
things cognizable by the body, tangibles, desirable, pleasant@dots{}
These, monks, are the five sensual elements. Whatsoever zest, monks,
arises owing to these five, that is called ``zest that is carnal''.

@end quotation

We then read about the `` zest that is not carnal'', which is pīti
accompanying the jhānacitta. At the moment of jhānacitta carnal zest
is temporarily subdued, one is not infatuated with the five ``sensual
elements''. We read about the ``zest that is still less carnal'' than
the other kinds:

@quotation
@dots{}And what monks, is the zest that is still less carnal than the
other?

That zest which arises in a monk who has destroyed the
āsavas@footnote{āsavas or ``cankers'' are a group into which
defilements are classified.}, who can look upon his heart as released
from lust---that zest, monks, is called ``the zest that is still less
carnal than the other''.

@end quotation

The same is said about pleasure, indifference and ``release'', which
can be carnal, not carnal and still less carnal. The term ``still less
carnal'' refers to the arahat who has eradicated all forms of
attachment so that it never arises again. This sutta reminds us again
to be aware of the realities appearing through the different doorways,
one at a time. We are usually so absorbed in people and things that we
forget that they are not realities, only concepts. It is not a person
which is experienced through the eyes, but only a kind of rūpa which
is visible object and does not last. We are infatuated with the
objects we experience and we do not realize when there is ``pīti which
is carnal''. Pīti which is carnal can arise on account of all the
objects we experience through the six doors. The sutta illustrates how
different pīti is when it arises with different types of citta. Pīti
is conditioned by the accompanying dhammas and, in its turn, it
conditions the accompanying dhammas. Pīti is saṅkhāra dhamma, not
self. We may find it difficult to know when enthusiasm is wholesome
and when it is unwholesome, but through mindfulness of it when it
appears its characteristic can be known more precisely.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
When we give a gift to someone and there is
somanassa (pleasant feeling), is there pīti as well? 

@item
What is
the function of pīti which arises with kusala citta? 

@item
When we
are helping someone with pleasant feeling and enthusiasm, is there
kusala pīti all the time? 

@item
How can we know the difference
between kusala pīti and akusala pīti? 

@item
Does pīti arise with each
kusala citta? 

@item
With how many types of lobha-mūla-citta does pīti
arise? 

@item
Which types of vipākacitta are accompanied by pīti?

@item
Does pīti always arise together with pleasant feeling, no matter
of what plane of consciousness the citta is which pīti accompanies?

@item
Pīti can be an enlightenment factor. How can we cultivate the
enlightenment factor of pīti? 

@item
Which factors can condition
kusala citta with pīti and somanassa? 

@item
Can recollections on the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha be helpful even to those who are not
ariyans and can therefore not really understand the meaning of Buddha,
Dhamma and Sangha? In what way can they be helpful? @end enumerate

@node Zeal
@chapter Zeal

@section Zeal (chanda)

Chanda, which is usually translated as zeal, desire or wish-to-do, is
another cetasika among the six ``particulars'' which arises with
cittas of the four jātis--but not with every citta. When we hear the
word ``desire'', we may think that chanda is the same as lobha.
However, chanda can be kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. The cetasika
chanda which is classified as one of the ``particulars'' is not the
same as lobha, it has its own characteristic and function@footnote{Sometimes the word chanda is used in a composite word such as
kāmacchanda, sensuous desire, which is one of the five hindrances.
This is a form of lobha.}. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 150) defines chanda as follows:

@quotation
Zeal (chanda) is a term for desire to act. So, that zeal has the
characteristic of desire to act. Its function is scanning for an
object. It is manifested as need for an object. That same (object) is
its proximate cause. It should be regarded as the extending of the
mental hand in the apprehending of an object.

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 132) gives a similar
definition. Chanda searches, looks for the object which citta
cognizes. Chanda needs that object which is also its proximate cause.

Chanda arises with the @emph{eight types of lobha-mūla-citta}. When
chanda arises with lobha-mūla-citta it searches for the desirable
object, it needs that object. Although chanda is different from lobha
which can only be of the jāti which is akusala, when they arise
together it is hard to distinguish between them. When we like to
obtain a pleasant object, lobha is attached and it is chanda which can
accomplish the obtaining of that desired object. Lobha could not
accomplish anything by itself. However, also when we do not need to
obtain an object we are attached to, there is chanda accompanying the
lobha-mūla-citta. 

Chanda arises also with the @emph{two types of dosa-mūla-citta}.
Chanda ``searches'' the object the dosa-mūla-citta dislikes. Here we
see more clearly that chanda is quite different from lobha which is
attached to an object and which can never accompany dosa-mūla-citta.

Chanda does not accompany the two types of moha-mūla-citta. One type
of moha-mūla-citta is accompanied by doubt (vicikicchā). Doubt has
``wavering'' as function, it is not sure about the object, and thus
there cannot be at the same time chanda which searches for the object
it needs. As we have seen, this type of moha-mūla-citta also lacks
``decision'' (adhimokkha), which is sure about the object. As to the
second type of moha-mūla-citta, which is accompanied by restlessness
or distraction (uddhacca-sampayutta), this type cannot be accompanied
by chanda either. 

As regards ahetuka cittas, ``rootless'' cittas, chanda does not
accompany these types of cittas. Seeing-consciousness, an ahetuka
vipākacitta which sees visible object, does not need chanda in order
to perform its function of seeing. Sampaṭicchana-citta which merely
``receives'' the object which was seen by seeing-consciousness does
not need chanda in order to perform its function of receiving. It is
the same with santīraṇa-citta and the other ahetuka cittas, they do
not need chanda in order to perform their functions.

If the functions of paṭisandhi (rebirth), bhavanga (life-continuum)
and cuti (dying) are performed by ahetuka citta@footnote{See
Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 11.}, the citta is not accompanied
by chanda.

As regards the @emph{kāmāvacara sobhana cittas}, they are always
accompanied by chanda. Whenever we perform kusala, the kusala citta is
accompanied by chanda which is zeal for kusala, which desires to act
in the wholesome way. It searches for the object the kusala citta
cognizes and it assists the kusala citta in carrying out its task.

One may wonder what the difference is between kusala chanda and kusala
cetanā which ``wills'' kusala. Kusala cetanā is the wholesome
intention, kamma, which can motivate a wholesome action and which is
able to produce its result later on. Moreover, kusala cetanā directs
the accompanying dhammas in carrying out their functions in a
wholesome way. Thus, its characteristic and function is different from
the characteristic and function of chanda.

Chanda is a necessary factor for all kinds of kusala, for dāna, for
sīla and for bhāvanā. When we, for example, visit a sick person, when
we want to console someone who is in trouble or when we try to save an
insect from drowning, there has to be kusala chanda which assists the
kusala citta. If there were no wholesome zeal, ``wish to act'', we
could not perform such acts of mettā (loving kindness) and karuṇā
(compassion).

Chanda is also a necessary factor for the development of calm. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} ( I, Part V, Chapter 13, 194) states in the section
on the development of the meditation subjects which are the ``divine
abidings'' (brahma vihāras) of mettā, karuṇā, muditā (sympathetic joy)
and upekkhā (equanimity) :
@quotation
@dots{}the wish-to-do (chanda) is the beginning; the discarding of
the hindrances is the middle; absorption is the end@dots{}

@end quotation

In order to develop a meditation subject the wish-to-do is necessary.
Without this wholesome desire one could not develop it. When calm has
been developed more the hindrances can be temporarily eliminated and
jhāna can be attained. Also at the moment of jhānacitta there is
chanda. 

Chanda accompanies all types of sobhana cittas. Chanda accompanies the
@emph{rūpāvacara cittas} and the @emph{arūpāvacara cittas.} The chanda
which accompanies these types of cittas is not kāmāvacara (of the
sense-sphere), but rūpāvacara or arūpāvacara. Chanda is different as
it accompanies different types of citta of different planes of
consciousness. Chanda which accompanies jhānacitta ``searches for''
the meditation subject which the jhānacitta experiences with
absorption. 

The lokuttara cittas are accompanied by chanda which ``searches for''
nibbāna. This kind of chanda is lokuttara, it is different from
longing for nibbāna. It assists the lokuttara citta to carry out its
function. The lokuttara citta and thus also the accompanying chanda
directly experience nibbāna@footnote{For details about the cittas
which are accompanied by chanda, see Appendix 6.}. 

How do we know when chanda is kusala and when it is akusala? For
instance, when we have desire for sati, is this kusala chanda or
attachment? We have accumulated a great deal of attachment and thus
there is likely to be more often attachment than kusala chanda. We are
attached to a concept of sati and we believe that we can cause its
arising. Wanting to have sati is different from the moment sati
arises. There are many moments of forgetfulness but sometimes there
may be a moment of mindfulness of only one object at a time appearing
through one of the six doors. When sati arises it is accompanied by
kusala chanda which performs its function. 

Kusala chanda is a necessary factor for the development of the
eightfold Path. If there is no wish-to-do one does not develop it.
However, we do not have to try to have chanda, it arises because of
its own conditions together with the citta which develops the
eightfold Path. 

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (V, Mahā-vagga, XLV, Kindred
Sayings on the Way, Chapter IV, II, Restraint of Passion, par3) that
chanda is one of the factors which are ``forerunners'' of the arising
of the ariyan eightfold Path:

@quotation

Just as, monks, the dawn is the forerunner, the harbinger of the
arising of the sun, so possession of desire (chanda) is the
forerunner, the harbinger of the arising of the ariyan eightfold way.

Of a monk who is possessed of desire, monks, it may be expected that
he will cultivate the ariyan eightfold way, that he will make much of
the ariyan eightfold way@dots{}

@end quotation

When we develop kusala, chanda may be predominant; it may have
predominance over the accompanying dhammas. There are four factors
which can be predominant, but only one at a time can be predominant.
The four predominant factors (adhipatis) are: chanda, viriya, citta
(particular types of citta) and ``investigation'' or ``reflection''
(vīmaṃsā, which is paññā cetasika)@footnote{See Dhammasangaṇi
par269, and Atthasālinī I, Part VII, 212,213. Citta can be a
predominant factor, but not all cittas; only the cittas which are
accompanied by at least two hetus and perform the function of javana
can be predominant. For example, lobha-mūla-citta and kusala citta can
be predominant, since they are rooted in more than one hetu, but
moha-mūla-citta cannot, since it is rooted only in moha. In the field
of kusala, when chanda, viriya or vīmaṃsā are not predominant, there
can be firmness of kusala citta which is predominant.}. When these
factors have been developed they become the four ``Roads to Success''
(iddhipādas) leading to the attainment of the ``supernormal powers''
(abhiññās). There are five ``supernormal powers'' which are developed
through jhāna (Vis. Chapter XII). The sixth power, which is the
extinction of all defilements, is developed through vipassanā. Chanda
or one of the three other ``Roads to Success'' can be predominant in
the development of vipassanā@footnote{The four ``Roads to Success''
are among the thirty seven factors pertaining to enlightenment,
bodhipakkhiya dhammas, Visuddhimagga XXII, 33.} . 

Thus we see that there are many kinds and degrees of chanda. Chanda is
conditioned by the citta and other cetasikas it accompanies. Chanda is
@emph{saṅkhāra dhamma,} conditioned dhamma. Different kinds of chanda
arise due to different conditions.

It is hard to distinguish the different kinds of cetasikas from each
other since there are several cetasikas at a time which accompany
citta and assist it in carrying out its function. As we have seen, the
``universals'' arise with each citta. Summarizing them, they are:

@itemize

@item
contact (phassa)

@item
feeling (vedanā)

@item
remembrance or ``perception'' (saññā)

@item
volition (cetanā)

@item
concentration (ekaggatā)

@item
life-faculty (jīvitindriya)

@item
attention (manasikāra)

@end itemize

As regards the six ``particulars'', they do not arise with every citta
but they arise with cittas of the four jātis. Summarizing them, they
are: 
@itemize

@item
applied thinking (vitakka)

@item
sustained thinking (vicāra)

@item
determination (adhimokkha)

@item
energy or effort (viriya)

@item
enthusiasm or rapture (pīti)

@item
zeal or wish-to-do (chanda)

@end itemize

The ``universals'' and the ``particulars'' arise with cittas of the
four jātis and these thirteen cetasikas are classified as one group:
the @emph{aññasamānā cetasikas''}@footnote{Añña means ``other'' and
samānā means ``common'', the same. The aññasamānās which arise
together are of the same jāti as the citta they accompany and they all
change, become ``other'', as they accompany a citta of a different
jāti. Akusala is ``other'' than kusala and kusala is ``other'' than
akusala.}. The aññasamānā cetasikas are different from the akusala
cetasikas which only arise with akusala cittas and different from
sobhana cetasikas which only arise with sobhana cittas. However, this
does not mean that the ``universals'' and the ``particulars'' cannot
be akusala or sobhana. When the aññasamānā cetasikas arise with
akusala citta they all are akusala; they assist the akusala citta to
carry out its function in an unwholesome way. When they accompany
kusala citta they all are kusala; they assist the kusala citta in
carrying out its function in a wholesome way. Cetasikas are
conditioned by the citta and the other cetasikas they accompany and
they are of an entirely different quality as they accompany akusala
citta, kusala citta, vipākacitta or kiriyacitta.

When akusala citta arises, it is accompanied by the ``universals'' and
by the ``particulars'' which are vitakka, vicāra, adhimokkha (except
in the case of moha-mūla-citta accompanied by vicikicchā, doubt),
viriya and chanda (except in the case of the two types of
moha-mūla-citta which are not accompanied by chanda). It is
accompanied by pīti only when the feeling is pleasant feeling. It is
also accompanied by cetasikas which arise only with akusala citta. The
``universals'' and the ``particulars'' are all akusala in this case.
Cetanā, for example, ``wills'' akusala; vitakka ``thinks'' of the
object in an unwholesome way; adhimokkha, if it arises, is convinced
about the object which is the object of akusala citta; viriya supports
the citta and accompanying cetasikas; pīti, if it arises, takes an
interest in the object; chanda, if it arises, needs the object,
searches for it.

When mahā-kusala citta (kāmāvacara kusala citta or kusala citta of the
sense-sphere) arises, it is accompanied by the ``universals'' and by
the ``particulars'' which are vitakka, vicāra, adhimokkha, viriya and
chanda. It is accompanied by pīti only when the feeling is pleasant
feeling. It is also accompanied by sobhana cetasikas which arise only
with sobhana citta. The ``universals'' and the ``particulars'' are all
kusala in this case. Cetanā, for example, ``wills'' kusala; vitakka
``thinks'' of the object in the wholesome way; adhimokkha is convinced
about the object which is the object of kusala citta; viriya supports
the citta and the accompanying cetasikas; pīti, if it arises, takes an
interest in the object and ``refreshes'' citta and the accompanying
cetasikas; chanda searches for the object in a wholesome way, it
assists the citta in the accomplishment of kusala.

As we have seen, the same type of cetasika is very different as it
accompanies different cittas. If we realize that cetasikas fall away
immediately together with the citta and that the next moment another
citta arises accompanied by other cetasikas, we will be less inclined
to think that we own such qualities as energy, determination or
enthusiasm. The more we study, the more will we understand, at least
on the theoretical level, that all phenomena which arise are
conditioned phenomena, saṅkhāra dhammas. We still act and think as if
there were a self, but as our confidence in the Buddha's teachings
grows, we will be inclined to develop the Path in order to directly
experience that all phenomena which arise are saṅkhāra dhammas, not
self.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
What is the difference between chanda and
lobha? 

@item
How can one know the difference between kusala chanda
and lobha? 

@item
Does kusala chanda always arise when we perform
wholesome deeds? 

@item
Akusala cetasikas arise only with akusala
cittas and sobhana cetasikas arise only with sobhana cittas. The
aññasamānā cetasikas arise with cittas of the four jātis. Is it
correct to say that the latter types are neither wholesome nor
unwholesome? 

@item
Why is it helpful to know that cetasikas such as
viriya or pīti can be at one moment kusala and shortly afterwards
akusala and thus entirely different? 

@item
Can the study of the
different cetasikas help us with the development of the Path? In what
way? @end enumerate 

@unnumbered PART III: Akusala Cetasikas

@node Introduction to Akusala Cittas
@chapter Introduction to Akusala Cittas

Akusala citta and akusala cetasika are akusala dhammas, dhammas which
are unskilful, unprofitable, unclean, impure. Do we realize when there
is akusala citta? Whenever the citta is not intent on wholesomeness,
we act, speak or think with akusala citta. We may not have unkind
thoughts or thoughts of coarse desire, but the cittas which think can
still be akusala cittas; they are akusala cittas whenever we do not
think wholesome thoughts. We think time and again of people, of things
which have happened or will happen, and we should find out for
ourselves when thinking is kusala and when akusala. When we are
``daydreaming'', do we think wholesome thoughts? If that is not so,
then the cittas are akusala cittas.

By akusala one harms oneself, other people or both oneself and other
people. We may find it difficult to see that even when we do not harm
or hurt others, the citta can still be akusala. For example, when we
like nature, there is a degree of attachment and attachment is not
kusala, it is different from unselfishness. We may see the danger of
akusala which is coarse, but it is difficult to see the danger of
akusala which is more subtle. However, through the study of the Dhamma
we can acquire more understanding of akusala dhammas and then we may
begin to see the danger of all degrees of akusala.

When the citta is kusala, there is confidence in wholesomeness. Kusala
citta is pure and it is capable of producing a pleasant result.
Whereas akusala citta is impure and it leads to sorrow. At the moment
of akusala citta there is no confidence in wholesomeness, one does not
see that akusala citta is impure and harmful. For example, when we see
a pleasant sight, akusala cittas with attachment tend to arise. At
such a moment there is ``unwise attention'' to the object which is
experienced; we are enslaved to that object and do not see the danger
of akusala. Thus we go on accumulating more and more akusala. 

If one has not listened to the Dhamma, one does not know exactly what
is kusala and what is akusala and thus there are many conditions for
unwise attention to the objects which are experienced through the five
sense-doors and through the mind-door. Foolish friends are also a
condition for akusala cittas. The person who is inclined to akusala
will associate with friends who have similar inclinations. Thus he
accumulates more and more vices and then it is very difficult to turn
to kusala and develop virtues. 

Akusala citta is bound to arise more often than kusala citta because
there have been countless akusala cittas in the past and thus the
conditions for akusala have been accumulated. If there is no
development of right understanding akusala cannot be eradicated and we
will continue to accumulate more akusala. 

The Buddha reminded people of the ill effects of akusala. Akusala
kamma is capable of producing an unpleasant result in the form of
rebirth or in the form of unpleasant experiences through the senses in
the course of our life. Through the doing of evil deeds one acquires a
bad name and one loses one's friends. Moreover, the person who commits
evil is not calm when he faces death. We read in the @emph{Gradual
Sayings} (Book of the Fours, the Fourth Fifty, Chapter XIX, par4,
Fearless) that the brāhmin Jāṇussoni said to the Buddha that he
believed that everyone was afraid of death. The Buddha thereupon spoke
to Jāṇussoni about four kinds of people who are afraid of death and
four who are not. We read that the Buddha said:

@quotation
@dots{}In this case, brāhmin, a certain one is not freed from
passions, not freed from lusts, not freed from desire, affection, from
thirst and fever, not freed from craving. Then a grievous sickness
afflicts such an one. Thus afflicted by grievous sickness it occurs to
him: Alas! The passions that I love will leave me, or I shall leave
the passions that I love. Thereupon he grieves and wails, laments and
beats the breast and falls into utter bewilderment. This one, brāhmin,
being subject to death, is afraid, he falls a-trembling at the thought
of death.

Again, brāhmin, here a certain one who as regards body is not freed
from lusts@dots{}is not freed from craving. Then a grievous sickness
afflicts him. Thus afflicted it occurs to him: Alas! The body that I
love will leave me, or I shall leave the body that I love. Thereupon
he grieves@dots{}and falls into utter bewilderment. This one,
brāhmin, being subject to death, is afraid, he falls a-trembling at
the thought of death@dots{}

@end quotation

The same is said about the person who has omitted good deeds and
committed evil, and about the person who is full of doubts as to
``true Dhamma''. The opposite is true of the people who do not have
these vices. When a grievous sickness afflicts them they are not
afraid of death. 

We make ourselves unhappy through unwholesome deeds, speech and
thoughts, and then we have no peace of mind. Akusala is a mental
disease and this is more grave than bodily disease.

Right understanding of the danger and ill effects of akusala can
condition kusala citta. But shortly after the kusala cittas have
fallen away, akusala cittas tend to arise again and at such moments we
have no confidence in wholesomeness. We may, for example, speak harsh
words to someone else and when the moments of anger have fallen away,
we cannot understand that we behaved in such a bad way. We may wonder
how we can be such a different person at different moments. In reality
there is no self who is at one moment kusala and at another moment
akusala. There are different types of citta which arise because of
their own conditions. Sometimes kusala citta arises but more often
akusala citta arises. There is no self who can prevent the arising of
akusala citta. 

Because of ignorance we take the satisfaction in pleasant experiences
through the senses for true happiness. Do we consider the enjoyment of
pleasant things the goal of our life? We tend to forget that pleasant
things do not last, that our body declines and that we are susceptible
to sickness and death. There is ignorance with each akusala citta. At
such a moment we do not know the danger of the accumulation of
akusala.

If we do not develop right understanding of realities we live with our
dreams and illusions. We want happiness for ourselves and we are
ignorant of what is kusala and what is akusala. Thus there is bound to
be decline in good qualities. We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings}
(Book of the Sixes, Chapter VIII, par10, Day and Night):

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, if a monk follow six things, come day come night, just
a falling away in right things may be expected, not a growth. What
six?

Herein, monks, a monk desires much, is fretful, discontented with this
and that requisite: robe, alms, lodging, medicaments---is without
faith or virtue, is indolent, forgetful in mindfulness and lacks
insight.

Monks, if a monk follow these six, come day come night, just a falling
away in right things may be expected, not a growth.

(But the opposite is true for a monk who is not like that.)

@end quotation

This sutta can remind both monks and laypeople that if there is no
mindfulness of the reality appearing at this moment, no development of
insight, there will be decline in good qualities.

The Buddha, when he was still a bodhisatta, considered the
satisfaction in life, the misery and also the escape therefrom. We
read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Threes, Chapter XI,
par101, Before): 

Before my enlightenment, monks, when I was yet but a Bodhisat, this
occurred to me: What, I wonder, is the satisfaction in the world, what
is the misery in the world, what is the escape therefrom?

Then, monks, this occurred to me: That condition in the world owing to
which pleasure arises, owing to which arises happiness,---that is the
satisfaction in the world. That impermanence, that suffering, that
changeability in the world,---that is the misery in the world. That
restraint, that riddance of desire and passion in the world,---that
is the escape therefrom@dots{}

The ``escape'' can be realized through the development of insight.
Right understanding of realities eventually leads to freedom from all
akusala, to the end of all sorrow.

The Abhidhamma teaches us in detail about all akusala dhammas. They
are not listed just to be read and memorized, they are
@emph{realities} of daily life and they can be known as they are by
being mindful of them. If we consider akusala dhammas when they appear
and begin to be mindful of them, we will come to know also defilements
which are more subtle. We will learn that behaviour and speech we
thought to be agreeable and pleasant are often motivated by
selfishness; this happens for example when we want to endear ourselves
to others in the expectation of some gain or favour from them. Our
actions and speech are more often motivated by akusala cittas than by
kusala cittas. Through the study of the Abhidhamma we learn about many
types of defilements which arise time and again in our daily life. We
learn about our tendencies and inclinations to akusala which we did
not know before. 

Among the cetasikas which can accompany akusala cittas, there are
three which are unwholesome roots, akusala hetus@footnote{There are
three akusala hetus and three sobhana (beautiful) hetus which are the
opposites of the akusala hetus. A root or hetu is the foundation of
the akusala citta or the sobhana citta, just as the roots are the
foundation of a tree.}. These hetus are the foundation of the akusala
citta. They are:
@itemize

@item
attachment or greed, in Pāli: lobha

@item
aversion or anger, in Pāli: dosa

@item
ignorance, in Pāli: moha
@end itemize

Besides these roots there are other akusala cetasikas which can
accompany akusala citta, and each of these has its own characteristic
and function. There are @emph{twelve types of akusala cittas} and they
are classified according to their roots. They are:

@itemize

@item
8 types of citta rooted in attachment, lobha-mūla-citta

@item
2 types of citta rooted in aversion, dosa-mūla-citta

@item
2 types of citta rooted in ignorance, moha-mūla-citta@footnote{See
Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 4, 6 and 7.} 

@end itemize
The cittas rooted in attachment have ignorance, moha, and attachment,
lobha, as their roots; the cittas rooted in aversion have moha and
aversion, dosa, as their roots; the cittas rooted in moha have moha as
their only root. There is ignorance with each akusala citta.

Akusala cittas are accompanied by the ``universals'' and by the
``particulars'', but not all particulars accompany every akusala
citta. When the universals and the particulars accompany akusala citta
they are also akusala. There are @emph{fourteen akusala cetasikas}
which can accompany only akusala citta, but not all akusala cetasikas
accompany each akusala citta. Some akusala cetasikas accompany only
certain types of akusala cittas. There are twelve types of akusala
citta, but there are many more varieties of them since they are, at
one time or other, accompanied by different cetasikas. Moreover,
akusala cittas can have many different degrees of akusala. Akusala
citta may or may not have the intensity to motivate an unwholesome
deed, akusala kamma patha.

There are @emph{four types of akusala cetasikas} which have to arise
@emph{with every akusala citta}. These cetasikas are:
@itemize

@item
ignorance, moha

@item
shamelessness, ahirika

@item
recklessness, anottappa

@item
restlessness, uddhacca

@end itemize

One of these, ignorance, is root, the other three are not roots. These
four types have to assist each akusala citta in performing its
function. So long as these types have not been eradicated akusala
citta will arise. Only the arahat has eradicated these four types. For
him there are no more conditions for the arising of akusala.

@node Ignorance Shamelessness Recklessness and Restlessness
@chapter Ignorance, Shamelessness, Recklessness and Restlessness

@section Moha

Moha, ignorance, is one of the four akusala cetasikas which are always
present when there is akusala citta. We read in the
@emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics,
par390) about moha, here translated as dullness:

@quotation
What on that occasion is dullness?

The lack of knowledge, of vision, which is there on that occasion; the
lack of coordination, of judgement, of enlightenment@footnote{The
Atthasālinī (II, 254), in its explanation of this passage of the
Dhammasangaṇi, states about lack of enlightenment that it is: ``not
connecting them (things) with impermanence, dukkha and anattā'', and
``perceiving in an unreal, distorted way''.}, of
penetration@footnote{No penetration of the four noble Truths.}; the
inability to comprehend, to grasp thoroughly; the inability to
compare, to consider, to demonstrate; the folly, the childishness, the
lack of intelligence; the dullness that is vagueness, obfuscation,
ignorance, the Flood (ogha) of ignorance, the Bond (yoga) of
ignorance, the bias@footnote{ignorance is a bias, it continually lies
latent, in the sense of being firmly fixed.} of
ignorance, the obsession of ignorance, the barrier of ignorance; the
dullness that is the root of badness---this is the dullness that
there then is. 
@end quotation

Ignorance is firmly fixed, it always lies latent and it is hard to
eradicate. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 249) gives the
following definition of moha:

@quotation
``Delusion'' has the characteristic of blindness or opposition to
knowledge; the essence of non-penetration, or the function of covering
the intrinsic nature of the object; the manifestation of being opposed
to right practice@footnote{In Pāli: patipatti. The English text
translates here as: right conduct.} or causing blindness; the
proximate cause of unwise attention; and should be regarded as the
root of all immoralities.
@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 163) gives a similar definition.

Moha is not the same as lack of worldly knowledge such as science or
history, but it is ignorance of ultimate realities. There are many
degrees of moha. Moha does not know the true nature of the object
which is experienced and therefore its essence is, as stated by the
@emph{Atthasālinī,} non-penetration and its function ``covering up''
the intrinsic nature of the object. Moha does not know nāma and rūpa
as impermanent, dukkha and non-self, anattā. Moha is the root of all
that is unwholesome. Every akusala citta is rooted in moha; not only
the two types of moha-mūla-citta, but also the types of
lobha-mūla-citta and dosa-mūla-citta have moha as root. 

Moha is a ``folly'', it is ``blindness'', because whenever there is
moha, there is ``unwise attention'' to the object which is
experienced. For example, when we eat delicious food, attachment is
bound to arise and then there is also moha. We are at that moment
enslaved to the object which is experienced and we do not know that
there is unwise attention. Moha does not know akusala as akusala and
kusala as kusala and it does not know the conditions for their
arising. If one has not studied the Dhamma one does not know that
whether akusala citta arises or not depends on the manner of attention
to the object and not on the pleasant or unpleasant objects
themselves. Thus, the citta is the source of kusala or akusala, not
the objects which are experienced, not the outward circumstances. We
desire pleasant objects and when the object is unpleasant we are
disappointed and sad. If one has not studied the Dhamma there is
ignorance of kamma and vipāka. When one suffers pain one does not
realize that the unpleasant experience through the bodysense is
vipāka, that it is the result of a bad deed which has been committed. 

If we study the Buddha's teachings we become less ignorant of
realities, we begin to have more understanding of kamma and vipāka, of
kusala and akusala, of ultimate realities. However, moha cannot be
eradicated merely by thinking about realities. It can eventually be
eradicated by the wisdom which knows the true nature of realities.
Although we have learnt what is kusala and what is akusala, there are
more often akusala cittas than kusala cittas. When we eat delicious
food, how often is there wise attention to the object? We read in the
@emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Threes, Chapter XIII, par121) that
the Buddha spoke about two kinds of monks who receive almsfood. We
read about a certain monk who has eaten the almsfood:

@quotation
Now it occurs to him: A good thing in sooth for me to be thus served
by a housefather or a housefather's son! Then he thinks: I should
indeed be glad to have this housefather or housefather's son serve me
in like manner in the future. Thus he enjoys that almsgiving and is
attracted by it, infatuated with it, attached to it. He sees not
danger therein. He is blind to the escape therefrom. The result is
that his train of thought is sensual, malevolent and harmful to
others. Now, monks, I declare that what is given to such a monk has no
great fruit. Why so? Because the monk lives amiss. 

@end quotation

We then read about a certain monk who is not attached to his almsfood.
What is given to him is of great fruit because he is vigilant. If
there is mindfulness of the reality which appears, also while eating,
right understanding can be developed.

Moha is the root of all that is unprofitable, of akusala which is
coarse and of akusala which is more subtle. When one commits akusala
kamma through body, speech or mind there is moha. There is ignorance
of the danger of akusala kamma which is capable of producing an
unpleasant result, even in the form of an unhappy rebirth. As we have
seen, moha accompanies each akusala citta. When there are akusala
cittas with avarice, jealousy or conceit, there is also moha. When one
takes realities for self there is wrong view, diṭṭhi, and at that
moment there is also moha. Moha conditions diṭṭhi but they are
different realities. Moha is ignorant of the true nature of realities
and diṭṭhi has wrong view about them. 

There is much ignorance about the processes of cittas which experience
objects through the six doors. Do we realize whether there is at this
moment seeing, hearing or thinking, or does it seem that these
experiences occur all at the same time? In reality only one object can
be experienced at a time through the appropriate doorway. When there
is hearing only sound is experienced through the ears and when we
think of the meaning of the words which are spoken there is not
hearing but thinking of concepts. Thinking arises in another process
of cittas, it arises in a mind-door process and this is different from
the ear-door process. Does it seem that hearing can stay for a while?
In reality this is not so, it falls away immediately. But when right
understanding has not been developed the arising and falling away of
cittas cannot be realized.

Moha is ignorant of the true nature of realities, it does not know
nāma and rūpa as they are. Moha is lack of knowledge about the four
noble Truths: about dukkha, the origination of dukkha, the ceasing of
dukkha and the way leading to the ceasing of dukkha@footnote{
Dhammasangaṇi, par1061.}. So long as ignorance has not been
eradicated we have to continue to be in the cycle of birth and death,
we have to be born again and again. The Pāli term @emph{avijjā} is
used for ignorance in connection with the ``Dependent Origination'',
the conditional arising of phenomena in the cycle of birth and death.
Avijjā is the first link in the chain of conditions for the
continuation of this cycle. At the attainment of arahatship ignorance
is eradicated and then there are no more conditions for rebirth.

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (III, Khandha-vagga, Kindred
Sayings on Elements, III, Last Fifty, Chapter 3, par129, Satisfaction)
that in the Deerpark at Isipatana Mahā-Koṭṭhita said to Sāriputta:

@quotation
``'Ignorance! Ignorance!' is the saying, friend Sāriputta. Pray,
friend, what is ignorance, and how far is one ignorant?''

``Herein, friend, the untaught manyfolk know not as it really is the
satisfaction in, the misery of, the escape from body. So with feeling,
perception, the activities@dots{}they know not the satisfaction in,
the misery of, the escape from consciousness.

This, friend, is ignorance, and thus far is one ignorant.''

@end quotation

In the next sutta (par130) it is said that wisdom is knowing as it
really is the satisfaction in, the misery of and the escape from the
five khandhas.

If there is no development of right understanding one does not see
that conditioned realities which arise and then have to fall away
again are dukkha, and thus there cannot be escape from dukkha.

It is hard to know the characteristic of moha. The Buddha taught us to
be mindful of the realities which appear, but we have many moments of
dullness. We should learn to see the difference between awareness and
forgetfulness of realities. When there is forgetfulness of realities
the citta is akusala. Even when there is no attachment or aversion,
there can be akusala citta; there can be the type of moha-mūla-citta
which is accompanied by restlessness (uddhacca)@footnote{There are two
types of moha-mūla-citta: one is accompanied by doubt
(vicikicchā-sampayutta) and one is accompanied by restlessness
(uddhacca-sampayutta).}. This type is bound to arise very often in
between the other types of akusala citta, but we do not realize it.
Ignorance is dangerous and extremely hard to eradicate. The sotāpanna
sees realities as they are, he has no more wrong view about them, but
he has not eradicated ignorance. Ignorance is eradicated stage by
stage and only the arahat has eradicated ignorance completely.

@section Shamelessness and Recklessness

Ahirika, shamelessness or
consciencelessness, and anottappa, recklessness or disregard of blame,
are two other akusala cetasikas which arise with each akusala citta.
In the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 160) ahirika is translated as
consciencelessness and anottappa as shamelessness. They are defined as
follows: 

Herein, it has no conscientious scruples, thus it is
consciencelessness. It is unashamed, thus it is shamelessness
(anottappa). Of these, ahirika has the characteristic of absence of
disgust at bodily misconduct, etc., or it has the characteristic of
immodesty. Anottappa has the characteristic of absence of dread on
their account, or it has the characteristic of absence of anxiety
about them@dots{}

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 248) gives a similar
definition. The @emph{Visuddhimagga} and the @emph{Atthasālinī} do not
give the function, manifestation and proximate cause of shamelessness
and recklessness. The @emph{Paramattha Mañjūsā} (Mahā-Tīka), a
commentary to the @emph{Visuddhimagga}, deals with these
aspects@footnote{I have used the Thai translation, given by Ms. Sujin
Boriharnwanaket, in her Abhidhamma lectures at the Saket Temple in
Bangkok.}. 

According to the @emph{Paramattha Mañjūsā}, the function of
shamelessness is doing evil without being ashamed of it, and the
function of recklessness is doing evil without dreading it. Their
manifestation is not to shrink or draw back from evil.

The two cetasikas shamelessness and recklessness seem to be very close
in meaning, but they have different characteristics. Shamelessness
does not shrink from evil because it is not ashamed of it and does not
abhor it. The ``Paramattha Mañjūsā'' compares it to a domestic pig
which does not abhor filth. Defilements are like filth, they are
unclean, impure. Shamelessness does not abhor defilements, be it
attachment, aversion, ignorance, avarice, jealousy, conceit or any
other kind of unwholesomeness.

As to recklessness, it does not abhor, draw back from evil because it
does not see the danger of akusala and it does not fear its
consequences such as an unhappy rebirth. The ``Paramattha Mañjūsā''
compares recklessness to a moth which is attracted to the fire,
although this is dangerous for it. Are we enslaved by pleasant
experiences? We may even commit evil through body, speech or mind on
account of them. Then recklessness does not fear the danger of
akusala, it does not care about the consequences of akusala.

The proximate cause of shamelessness is lack of respect for oneself
and the proximate cause of recklessness is lack of respect for someone
else. In order to have more understanding of this, we should first
study their opposites: moral shame, hiri, and moral fear of blame,
ottappa. Shame has a subjective origin, it is influenced by oneself;
its proximate cause is self-respect. Fear of blame has an external
cause, it is influenced by the world; its proximate cause is respect
for someone else.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 125) states that shame,
which has a subjective origin, arises from consideration of one's
birth, one's age, heroism (courage and strength) and wide experience.
In the case of shamelessness there is lack of such considerations. For
example, when we give in to anger or when we are jealous of someone
else who receives praise or other pleasant things, there is no
consideration of our education or upbringing in morality. At such
moments we have no moral strength, we behave like a weakling or a
fool, in a childish way. Thus, at the moment of akusala citta there is
lack of respect for ourselves, we are forgetful of all we have learnt
from the Buddha's teachings.

As regards the origin of recklessness, anottappa, we should study
first what is said about the origin of its opposite, ottappa or fear
of blame. We refrain from evil owing to fear of blame from without,
from the ``world''. Thus, fear of blame has an external origin. In the
case of recklessness, anottappa, there is lack of fear of blame or
punishment from the ``world''. When someone, for example, steals, he
may acquire a bad name, he may be punished for this crime, but at the
moment of akusala citta there is no consideration of such factors and
there is lack of respect for others.

When there are conditions for the arising of akusala citta,
shamelessness is not ashamed of akusala and recklessness does not fear
its consequences. We may think that we are ashamed of and abhor
killing or stealing and that we will never do such things. However,
when the situation becomes difficult good intentions are forgotten and
then we have no shame or fear of doing evil deeds. For example,
generally we may not lie, but out of consideration for our relatives
or friends we may not be ashamed of lying. 

Akusala cittas arise time and again and these are always accompanied
by shamelessness and recklessness. Also when the akusala citta does
not have the intensity to motivate evil deeds, for example, when we
are thinking with ignorance and forgetfulness of realities, there are
shamelessness and recklessness performing their functions. It may seem
that forgetfulness of realities is not so dangerous, since we do not
harm other people by it. However, all kinds and degrees of akusala are
dangerous. If right understanding is not developed defilements
cannot be eradicated and we have to be subject to birth, old age,
sickness and death, again and again. After there have been many
moments of forgetfulness, mindfulness may arise again and then we are
ashamed of our ignorance and forgetfulness of realities, and we see
its danger. 

We read in @emph{As it was said} (Itivuttaka, The Twos, Chapter II,
par3, Khuddaka Nikāya):

@quotation
This was said by the Exalted One@dots{}

``Monks, ignorance leads the way to the attainment of unprofitable
things; shamelessness and disregard of blame follow after. But,
monks, knowledge leads the way to the attainment of profitable things,
shrinking and fear of blame follow after.''

@end quotation

This is the meaning@dots{}

@example

What so be these ill-bourns in this world and the next,
All rooted are in ignorance, of lust compounded.
And since the wicked man is void of shame, and has
No reverence, therefore he works wickedness,
And through that wickedness he to the Downfall goes.
Wherefore forsaking longing, lust and ignorance
And causing knowledge to arise in him, a monk
Should give up, leave behind, the ill-bourns one and all@dots{}

@end example

When we see that all akusala dhammas are ugly and impure, we do not
neglect mindfulness of realities, such as hardness, seeing or sound
which appear at this moment. This is the only way to develop the
wisdom which can eradicate defilements. For the arahat there are no
conditions for akusala and thus shamelessness and recklessness do not
arise. 

@section Restlessness

Uddhacca, translated as restlessness, agitation, excitement or
confusion, is another akusala cetasika which arises with each akusala
citta. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 250) gives the
following definition of uddhacca:

@quotation
@dots{}It has mental excitement as characteristic like wind-tossed
water; wavering as function, like a flag waving in the wind; whirling
as manifestation like scattered ashes struck by a stone; unsystematic
thought owing to mental excitement as proximate cause; and it should
be regarded as mental distraction over an object of excitement.
@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 165) gives a similar
definition@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi par429.}. The commentaries
illustrate with similes that when there is uddhacca, there is no
steadiness, there is not the stable condition, the calm, of kusala.
When there is uddhacca there is forgetfulness of kusala, whereas when
there is mindfulness, sati, there is watchfulness, non-forgetfulness
of kusala, be it generosity, morality, the development of calm or
insight. Mindfulness is watchful so that the opportunity for kusala is
not wasted. 

Uddhacca is not the same as what we mean by ``restlessness'' or
``agitation'', used in conventional language. When we use the word
restlessness we usually think of aversion and unpleasant feeling.
However, uddhacca arises with each akusala citta, not only with citta
rooted in aversion, dosa-mūla-citta, but also with citta rooted in
attachment, lobha-mūla-citta, and citta rooted in ignorance,
moha-mūla-citta. When there is uddhacca we are forgetful as to
kusala, we are unable to apply ourselves to any kind of kusala. Even
when there is pleasant feeling, for example, when we are attached to a
quiet place, there is restlessness, uddhacca, which arises together
with lobha-mūla-citta. We may think that we are calm at such a
moment, but we have actually ``mental excitement''. 

It is difficult to know exactly when the citta is kusala and when it
is akusala. We may take for calm what is actually akusala. If someone
wants to develop samatha, the calm which is wholesome, he has to know
very precisely when the citta is kusala and when it is akusala. Thus,
samatha cannot be developed without right understanding. Understanding
knows when the citta is peaceful in the wholesome way and when the
citta is clinging to quietness and thus akusala. 

As we have seen, uddhacca accompanies each akusala citta, it
accompanies lobha-mūla-citta, dosa-mūla-citta and moha-mūla-citta.
There are two types of moha-mūla-citta, one is associated with doubt
and one is associated with restlessness. The fact that one type of
moha-mūla-citta is called ``associated with restlessness'',
uddhacca-sampayutta, does not mean that restlessness does not arise
with the type of moha-mūla-citta which is associated with doubt. The
second type of moha-mūla-citta is called ``associated with
restlessness'' in order to differentiate it from the first type of
moha-mūla-citta which is associated with doubt. 

Restlessness arises very often, but we do not notice it. It is one of
the ``five hindrances''@footnote{Defilements are classified into
different groups and one of these are the ``hindrances'', which are
the following: sensuous desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor,
restlessness and regret, and doubt.} and as such it is mentioned as a
pair with regret (kukkucca). Restlessness prevents the citta from
applying itself to kusala, thus it is a hindrance. We often waste
opportunities for kusala. Time and again we are thinking with akusala
citta, for example, we think with worry of the tasks which lie ahead
of us. However, even while we are thinking there is an opportunity for
kusala, namely the development of right understanding. There are
realities all the time which have different characteristics, and these
can be known when there is non-forgetfulness of them. Also thinking is
a reality with its own characteristic and this can be known when it
appears. When there is mindfulness there is no restlessness.

Only the arahat has eradicated restlessness. So long as there are
still conditions for the arising of akusala citta, it has to be
accompanied by moha, ignorance, which is ignorant of realities, by
ahirika, shamelessness, which does not abhor akusala, by anottappa,
recklessness, which does not fear the consequences of akusala, and by
uddhacca, restlessness, which is restless as to kusala. No matter
whether the akusala citta is coarse or more subtle, these four akusala
cetasikas have to accompany the akusala citta and assist it in
performing its function. 

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
How many akusala cittas are accompanied by
ignorance? 

@item
Why is the manifestation of ignorance ``causing
blindness''? 

@item
Of what is moha ignorant? 

@item
Can ignorance
experience an object? 

@item
What is the difference between hiri,
shamelessness and 

@item
anottappa, recklessness? 

@item
Why does one
not see, at the moment of akusala citta, that 

@item
akusala is impure
and why does one not fear its danger? 

@item
When we enjoy nature is
there restlessness? 

@item
Why is understanding a necessary factor not
only for the 

@item
development of insight but also for the development
of samatha? 

@item
Can restlessness experience an object?
@end enumerate 

@node Attachment
@chapter Attachment 

@section Attachment (lobha)

Akusala dhammas are altogether different from kusala dhammas. Akusala
dhammas are impure, they are dangerous and they lead to sorrow. As we
have seen, there are four akusala cetasikas which arise with every
akusala citta: moha (ignorance), ahirika (shamelessness), anottappa
(recklessness) and uddhacca (restlessness). Apart from these four
akusala cetasikas there are several other akusala cetasikas which can
accompany akusala citta.

Lobha, attachment or greed, is another akusala cetasika. Lobha does
not arise with every akusala citta, it can arise only with eight types
of citta, the eight types of lobha-mūla-citta@footnote{See my
Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter IV.}. Lobha is a ``root'', hetu.
The lobha-mūla-cittas have both moha and lobha as their roots.

The @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1059), in the section where it deals with
lobha as hetu, gives a long list of different names for lobha in order
to illustrate its different shades and aspects. Lobha is compared to a
creeper, it strangles its victim such as a creeper strangles a tree.
It is like the ocean, it is insatiable. Lobha can be coarse or it can
be more subtle such as hoping or expecting. It is a ``bondage''
because it binds beings in the round of births. It is a depravity
because it corrupts the mind@footnote{See the Atthasālinī II, Book II,
Chapter II, 362-367.}. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 162) gives the following definition of
lobha:
@dots{}greed has the characteristic of grasping an object like
``monkey lime''. Its function is sticking, like meat put in a hot pan.
It is manifested as not giving up, like the dye of lamp-black. Its
proximate cause is seeing enjoyment in things that lead to bondage.
Swelling with the current of craving, it should be regarded as taking
(beings) with it to states of loss, as a swift-flowing river does to
the great ocean.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 249) gives a similar
definition@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi par389.}. 

Greed has the characteristic of grasping like monkey lime. Monkey lime
was used by hunters in order to catch monkeys. We read in the
@emph{Kindred Sayings} (V, Mahā-vagga, Book III, Chapter I, par7, The
monkey) that a hunter sets a trap of lime for monkeys. Monkeys who are
free from ``folly and greed'' do not get trapped. We read:

@quotation
@dots{}But a greedy, foolish monkey comes up to the pitch and
handles it with one paw, and his paw sticks fast in it. Then,
thinking: I'll free my paw, he seizes it with the other paw, but that
too sticks fast. To free both paws he seizes them with one foot, and
that too sticks fast. To free both paws and the one foot, he lays hold
of them with the other foot, but that too sticks fast. To free both
paws and both feet he lays hold of them with his muzzle: but that too
sticks fast.

So that monkey thus trapped in five ways lies down and howls, thus
fallen on misfortune@dots{}

@end quotation

In this way the hunter can catch him and roast him over the fire. The
Buddha explained to the monks that the monk who is not mindful gets
trapped by the ``five sensual elements'': visible object, sound,
scent, savour and tangible object. When one is taken in by these
objects, ``Māra gets access''@footnote{Māra is that which is evil,
akusala, and in a wider sense: everything which is bound up with
dukkha.}. Clinging is dangerous, it leads to one's own destruction.
Are we at this moment taken in by one of the ``five sensual
elements''? Then we are in fact ``trapped''. At the moment of lobha we
enjoy the object of clinging and we do not see that lobha makes us
enslaved, we do not see the danger of lobha. Therefore it is said that
the proximate cause of lobha is seeing enjoyment in things that lead
to bondage. Growing into a river of craving, lobha takes us to the
``states of loss''. Lobha can motivate unwholesome deeds which are
capable of producing an unhappy rebirth. So long as lobha has not been
eradicated we are subject to birth, old age, sickness and death.

Lobha is attached to many different kinds of objects and it has many
degrees. Different names can denote the cetasika which is lobha. Rāga
(greed), abhijjā (covetousness) and taṇhā (craving) are other names
for lobha. When lobha is coarse it motivates akusala kamma patha
(unwholesome course of action) through body, speech or mind. Because
of lobha one may commit many kinds of bad deeds in order to obtain
what one desires. If the degree of akusala is such that it motivates
an evil deed, the result of it may be an unhappy rebirth or unpleasant
experiences through the senses in the course of life. Lobha can
motivate akusala kamma pathas through the body, which are stealing and
sexual misbehaviour, and akusala kamma pathas through speech which are
lying, slandering and idle talk. Lobha can motivate
@emph{covetousness} or @emph{abhijjā,} the desire to take away someone
else's property, which is akusala kamma patha through the mind.
Moreover, when it is accompanied by diṭṭhi, it can motivate certain
kinds of wrong view which are akusala kamma patha through the
mind@footnote{Certain kinds of wrong view, not every kind, are akusala
kamma patha through the mind. I shall deal with these in Chapter 16.
}. As regards covetousness, the @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX,
Chapter I, 249) states that it should be regarded as the outstretched
hand of the mind (reaching) for others' prosperity. If one merely
wishes to have someone else's property but does not plan to take it
away, greed is not akusala kamma patha. There are many degrees of
greed and only when one really plans to take away someone else's
property it is akusala kamma patha through the
mind@footnote{Atthasālinī I, Part III, Chapter V, 101.}. 

We may not have the intention to steal, but our wish to obtain
something for ourselves can condition behaviour and speech which is
not sincere. The @emph{Book of Analysis} (Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17,
par851) speaks about people who have ``evil wishes'', that is, who
pretend to have qualities they do not possess; they may pretend to be
virtuous, wise and even without defilements. The monk may behave in a
hypocritical way in order to obtain requisites. The @emph{Vibhaṅga}
(par861, 862) gives us striking examples of ``guile'' and
``insinuating talk'':

Therein, what is ``guile''? In one who depends on gain, honour and
fame, who has evil wishes, who is troubled by wishes: by the so called
using of the requisites, by talking allusively, by the setting up or
by the arranging or by the proper arranging of the posture: there is
knitting the brows, act of knitting the brows, guile, being guileful,
state of being guileful. This is called guile.

Therein, what is ``insinuating talk''? In one who depends on gain,
honour and fame, who has evil wishes, who is troubled by wishes: that
which to others is welcoming talk, insinuating talk, entertaining
talk, laudatory talk, flattering talk, inferential talk, repeated
inferential talk, coaxing talk, repeated coaxing talk, constant
pleasant talk, servility (in talking), beansoupery (in talking),
dandling (behaviour). This is called insinuating talk.

``Beansoupery'' is talk of which only a little is true, the rest being
false, just as in beansoup, only a few beans do not get cooked, and
the greater part gets cooked@footnote{Visuddhimagga I, 75.}. 

These passages are also excellent reminders for laypeople: one may
have lovely manners but in reality one may be full of hypocrisy and
pretence. Pleasant speech can easily have selfish motives. Don't we
want to be popular, to be liked by others? In order to endear
ourselves to others we may even tell lies or slander. When there is
mindfulness of the present reality we can find out whether our nice
way of speaking is in reality flattering and coaxing talk or not.
Through mindfulness we can become more sincere in our behaviour.

There is lobha, not only when we want to obtain things, but also when
we enjoy pleasant sights, sounds, smells, flavours, tangible objects
and mental objects. Don't we like softness while we are sitting or
lying down? When we sit on a hard floor we have aversion, and when we
sit in a comfortable chair we find it agreeable and then there is
lobha. Are we not attached to temperature, to the temperature which is
just right for us: not too hot, not too cold? When we drink coffee or
tea we want it to be of the temperature we like. When eating and
drinking we are attached not only to flavour, but also to temperature.
And don't we like the smell of our food, the sight of it and the
softness or hardness of it? There is bound to be attachment through
each of the six doors, time and again.

Lobha may be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent
feeling. When it is accompanied by pleasant feeling there is
enthusiasm (pīti) as well. When there is pleasant feeling we are
delighted with it and then pleasant feeling becomes another object of
attachment. When there is attachment there is also ignorance,
shamelessness, recklessness and restlessness (uddhacca). Ignorance
does not see the true nature of the object of clinging, it does not
see that it is only a conditioned reality which does not stay.
Shamelessness is not ashamed of akusala and recklessness does not see
its danger. Restlessness is instability due to akusala, it prevents
the citta from applying itself to kusala. 

Lobha can be accompanied by indifferent feeling and then it is not as
intense as when it is accompanied by pleasant feeling. When we want to
go somewhere or want to do something, lobha is likely to arise, but it
may not always be accompanied by pleasant feeling, there may be
indifferent feeling instead. Lobha-mūla-citta with indifferent feeling
is likely to arise countless times, but we are so ignorant, we do not
notice it.

All degrees of lobha are dangerous, even the more subtle forms of
lobha. When we do evil deeds which harm others it is evident that
lobha is dangerous. But when lobha is only enjoyment of a pleasant
sight or sound and we do not harm other people, we find it harder to
see the danger of lobha. Lobha, be it gross or more subtle, makes us
enslaved. When there is lobha we cling to the object which is
experienced at that moment and we take it for happiness. The next
moment the pleasant object is gone and then we are likely to have
aversion. The Buddha reminded people of the futility of
sense-pleasures. We read in the @emph{Dhammapada} (verses 146-149):

@example

What is laughter, what is joy, when the world is ever burning?
Shrouded by darkness, do you not seek a light?
Behold this beautiful body, a mass of sores, a heaped-up (lump),
diseased, much thought of, in which nothing lasts, 
        nothing persists. 
Thoroughly worn out is this body, a nest of diseases, perishable;
This putrid mass breaks up; truly life ends in death.

@end example

Lobha is extremely hard to eradicate because it has been accumulated,
also in past lives; it is deeply rooted. Even when we have studied the
Dhamma and we have heard about the dangers of lobha we still want
pleasant things for ourselves. We want possessions and we are attached
to people. At the moment of attachment we do not realize that all the
things we desire are susceptible to change, that they cannot last.

We read in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (I, no. 26), in the
``Discourse on the Ariyan Quest'', that the Buddha spoke to the monks
about the ariyan quest and the unariyan quest. The unariyan quest is
the seeking of all the things which are impermanent. The Buddha spoke
about things which are ``liable to birth''. Birth is followed by decay
and death. Whatever is born, what has arisen because of conditions,
has to fall away, it cannot be true happiness. We read:

@quotation
@dots{}And what monks, is the unariyan quest? As to this, monks,
someone, liable to birth because of self, seeks what is likewise
liable to birth; being liable to ageing because of self, seeks what is
likewise liable to ageing; being liable to decay because of
self@dots{}being liable to dying because of self@dots{}being liable
to sorrow because of self@dots{}being liable to stain because of
self, seeks what is likewise liable to stain. And what, monks, would
you say is liable to birth? Sons and wife, monks, are liable to birth,
women-slaves and men-slaves are liable to birth, goats and sheep are
liable to birth, cocks and swine are liable to birth, elephants, cows,
horses and mares are liable to birth, gold and silver are liable to
birth. These attachments, monks, are liable to birth; yet this (man),
enslaved, infatuated, addicted, being liable to birth because of self,
seeks what is likewise liable to birth@dots{}
@end quotation

It is then explained that all the things which are mentioned as being
liable to birth are also liable to ageing, disease, dying, sorrow and
stain. We are attached to family, possessions, gold and silver, to
everything we believe can give us pleasure. We long for what is
pleasant and we have aversion when we do not get what we want. Our
attachment is a source of endless frustrations. Further on in the
sutta we read that the person who sees the peril of all the things
which are impermanent seeks ``the unborn, uttermost security from the
bonds- nibbāna''. This is the ariyan quest. We may understand the
disadvantage of lobha, but lobha cannot be eradicated immediately.
This sutta can remind us to develop right understanding of realities,
since this can eventually lead to the eradication of lobha. 

The Buddha taught people to be mindful of whatever reality appears.
When akusala dhamma appears it can be object of awareness and right
understanding. Some people may feel guilty when there is attachment to
pleasant things and they may be inclined to think that they should not
be mindful of lobha. If we have accumulations for arts such as
painting or music should we give these up in order to develop
vipassanā? That would not be the right practice. We should know the
realities of our daily life. One person has accumulations for art,
another is skilful in cooking or writing, we all have different
accumulations. A layman does not live the monk's life, he could not
force himself to live as a monk. We should develop understanding in
our daily life, because then we will see that whatever arises, does so
because of its own conditions. 

The characteristic of lobha can be known only when it appears. When we
help someone else there are likely to be many moments of attachment in
between the moments of true generosity. Are we pleased to be in the
company of the person we help, are we attached to him? Are we pleased
with ``our own'' kusala and do we expect something in return for our
kindness? Mindfulness of realities is the only way to know the
different moments of wholesomeness and unwholesomeness more clearly.
Mindfulness will prevent us from deluding ourselves.

There may be attachment even to kusala, to calm or to mindfulness,
sati. We want to have a great deal of sati and we want it to last,
but wanting to have sati is not sati, it is clinging. We should not
avoid being aware of such clinging when it appears, because only if we
know it as it is can it be eradicated.

There are time and again experiences through the different doorways.
There is seeing, hearing, the experience of tangible object or
thinking. It seems that all these experiences arise immediately one
after the other. However, they arise in different processes and in
these processes there are ``javana-cittas''@footnote{See my Abhidhamma
in Daily Life, Chapter 14. There are usually seven cittas in a process
performing the function of javana, ``running through the object''.}
which are either kusala cittas or akusala cittas. For example, shortly
after hearing, which is vipākacitta (result of kamma), has arisen and
fallen away, there may be attachment to sound, and then there are
lobha-mūla-cittas, performing the function of javana. Even during the
sense-door process, before the object is experienced through the
mind-door, lobha can arise. The javana-cittas which arise in the
different processes of cittas, experiencing objects through the six
doors, are more often akusala cittas then kusala cittas, but we are
ignorant of them. After a sense-object such as sound is experienced
through the ear-door, it is experienced by cittas arising in a
mind-door process. The cittas arising in the mind-door process which
follows upon the sense-door process, in this case the ear-door
process, merely experience the sound, they do not think about it, and
they do not know what kind of sound it is. After that process there
can be other mind-door processes of cittas which think of the source
of the sound, of the meaning of it, of concepts. The thinking of
concepts after the seeing, hearing or the experiences through the
other sense-doors, is usually done with lobha, even if we do not feel
particularly glad. When we, for example, after hearing a sound, know
that it is the sound of a bird, this is not hearing but thinking, and
this is usually done with lobha. We want to know the meaning of what
we hear. We want to know the meaning of all we have experienced
through the senses. When we pay attention to the shape and form of
things, after the seeing, there is thinking of concepts, which is
usually done with clinging. We @emph{like} to notice all the familiar
things around us, we would not like to miss noticing them. Thus, we
have many moments of clinging arising in sense-door processes and
mind-door processes; we have many more moments of lobha than we ever
thought and it is beneficial to realize this. It can remind us to be
aware of the different realities which appear in order to know them as
they are.

The Buddha reminded people of the many forms of lobha in order to help
them to develop right understanding. This is the aim of the many
classifications of realities we find in the scriptures. @emph{Taṇhā},
for example, is another word which denotes lobha. Taṇhā is usually
translated as craving. Taṇhā can be classified in the following
way@footnote{Book of Analysis, Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17, Analysis of Small
Items, par916.}: 
@itemize

@item
kāma-taṇhā or sensuous craving

@item
bhava-taṇhā or craving for existence

@item
vibhava-taṇhā or craving for non-existence

@end itemize

Kāma-taṇhā is craving for the sense-objects which are experienced
through the six doors as well as craving for kāmāvacara cittas (cittas
of the sense-sphere) and the accompanying cetasikas. We cling not only
to visible object or sound but also to seeing and hearing. We want to
see and hear, we want to go on experiencing objects through the
senses. Kāma-taṇhā may be accompanied by wrong view or it may be
unaccompanied by wrong view. 

Bhāva-taṇhā is craving for becoming. This kind of clinging may be
accompanied by wrong view or not. The kind of bhava-taṇhā which is
accompanied by wrong view, diṭṭhi, is ``eternity view'', the belief
that realities last. Because of eternity view one believes that there
is a self who will continue to exist forever.

There may also be clinging to rebirth without the wrong view of self
who continues to exist. Clinging to the result of rūpa-jhāna
(fine-material jhāna), which is rebirth in a rūpa-brahma plane, and
clinging to the result of arūpa-jhāna (immaterial jhāna), which is
rebirth in an arūpa-brahma plane, are forms of clinging which are
included in bhava-taṇhā. 

Vibhava-taṇhā, craving for non-becoming, is annihilation-belief which
is a kind of wrong view. This is the belief that there is a self who
will be annihilated after death. People who have this view do not see
that so long as there are conditions for the arising of nāma and rūpa,
they will arise again and again. Since they do not understand this
they believe that there is no rebirth.

There are different ways of classifying taṇhā. The
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (XVII, 234-236) deals with
@emph{hundred-and-eight kinds of craving. There} are six kinds of
craving for the objects experienced through the six doors, and each of
these six kinds can be reckoned as threefold according to its mode of
occurrence as craving for sense-objects, craving for becoming and
craving for non-becoming. As regards craving for becoming, the
eternity view can arise in connection with what is experienced through
each of the six doors: there is the belief that these objects last. As
regards the craving for non-becoming, the annihilation view can arise
in connection with what is experienced through each of the six doors.
In this way one can count eighteen kinds of craving. Moreover, there
can be craving for ``one's own'' colour or for colour outside oneself
and even so with regard to the other objects, including the objects of
craving for becoming and craving for non-becoming. In this way one can
count thirty six kinds of craving. If one takes into account craving
in the past, craving in the present and craving in the future, there
are one hundred-and-eight kinds of craving. The different
classifications of taṇhā remind us of the fact that there are many
kinds of clinging to different objects. 

The sotāpanna ( the streamwinner, who has attained the first stage of
enlightenment) has eradicated clinging which is accompanied by wrong
view, but the other forms of clinging may still arise. The anāgāmī
(the non-returner, who has attained the third stage of enlightenment)
has eradicated all forms of sensuous clinging, but he still clings to
birth. He may cling to rūpa-jhāna and its result and to arūpa-jhāna
and its result. He has no ``eternity view'' because he is without
wrong view. The arahat has eradicated all kinds of clinging, he does
not cling to any kind of rebirth. For him there are no longer
conditions for rebirth.

When there is mindfulness of the present object more often, we will
see more clearly how deep-rooted our clinging is. We can prove in this
way that the Abhidhamma teaches about realities. We will learn that
there is clinging to all the objects which are experienced through the
six doors. 

So long as there is clinging there will be birth, old age, sickness
and death. Desire is the second noble Truth, the origin of dukkha. We
read in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (III, no. 141, the Analysis
of the Truths) that Sāriputta said to the monks about the second noble
Truth:

And what, your reverences, is the ariyan truth of the arising of
dukkha? Whatever craving is connected with again-becoming,
accompanied by delight and attachment, finding delight in this and
that, namely the craving for sense-pleasures, the craving for
becoming, the craving for annihilation---this, your reverences, is
called the ariyan truth of the arising of dukkha.

Craving is one of the links in the ``Dependent Origination''.
Ignorance and craving are the roots of the ``wheel of becoming'', the
cycle of birth and death (@emph{Visuddhimagga} XVII, 285). 

In the @emph{Thera-gāthā} (57, Kuṭivihārin 2) the kamma which produces
rebirth is symbolised by the building of a dwelling place, a hut. Who
still has desire to ``build'' will be reborn. A Thera did his studies
in an old hut. He thought: ''This old hut is now rotten; I ought to
make another''. So he turned his mind to new action (kamma). A spirit
who was seeking salvation said to him:

@example

This was an ancient hut, you say? To build
Another hut, a new one, is your wish?
O cast away the longing for a hut!
New hut will bring new pain, monk, to you.

@end example

When the Thera heard these words he was agitated, developed insight
and attained arahatship. For him there were no more conditions for
rebirth, since he was free from clinging.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Why is lobha-mūla-citta dangerous, even when
it does not have the intensity to motivate bad deeds? 

@item
Visible
object is what appears through the eyes, it is not a ``thing''. Can
attachment to visible object arise during the eye-door process? 

@item
Even the sotāpanna who has realized that phenomena are impermanent and
non-self has attachment to pleasant things. How is that possible?

@item
Is bhava-taṇhā, craving for becoming, always accompanied by
wrong view? 

@item
Who has eradicated all forms of bhava-taṇhā? 

@item
Can the sotāpanna (streamwinner) have vibhava-taṇhā, clinging to
non-existence? 

@item
Can the anāgāmī (non-returner) have clinging to
seeing? 

@item
Can the anāgāmī have attachment to jhāna? 

@item
Is it
possible to have attachment when we help someone else? 

@item
Can
attachment to sati be a hindrance to the development of the eightfold
Path? 

@item
Attachment to music is akusala. Monks are not allowed to
apply themselves to music. Should even laypeople give up music in
order to develop vipassanā? 

@item
Can attachment be the object of
mindfulness? 

@end enumerate

@node Wrong View 
@chapter Wrong View 
@section Wrong View (diṭṭhi)


The Buddha taught the truth about all realities which appear in daily
life: seeing, hearing, attachment, hardness, softness, heat, cold and
all the other phenomena which can be experienced. However, we are
ignorant of the realities in and around ourselves and we have wrong
view about them.

What is wrong view? It is a distorted view of realities, a
misinterpretation of them. Do we, for example, know hearing as only an
element which hears or do we still cling to an idea of self who hears?
Do we know sound as it is, as only a reality which can be heard, or do
we take what is heard for a ``person'' or a ``thing'' such as a voice
or a car? Person, voice or car are concepts we can think of but which
cannot be heard. Hearing and thinking occur at different moments and
these realities experience different objects. Only one object can be
experienced at a time through the appropriate doorway, but we still
have many misunderstandings about reality. Through the study of the
Dhamma we may have acquired theoretical understanding of realities as
being impermanent and non-self, but wrong view cannot be eradicated
through theoretical understanding. It can only be eradicated through
the practice, through the development of the eightfold Path.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter I, 248) gives the
following definition of wrong view, diṭṭhi:
@dots{}It has unwise conviction as characteristic; perversion as
function; wrong conviction as manifestation; the desire not to see the
ariyans as proximate cause. It should be regarded as the highest
fault.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 164) gives a similar definition of
diṭṭhi. The @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par38) calls diṭṭhi a ``wrong
road'' and the @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter II, 253)
explains:
@dots{}From being not the right path, it is a ``wrong path''. For
just as one who is gone astray, although he holds that this is the
path to such a village, does not arrive at a village, so a man of
false opinions, although he holds that this is the path to a happy
destiny, cannot get there; hence from being not the right path it is a
wrong path@dots{}

Diṭṭhi has unwise conviction@footnote{In Pāli: ayoniso abhinivesa,
unwise inclination, unwise adhering.} as characteristic. When there
is diṭṭhi one clings to a false view of reality. Its function is
``perversion''@footnote{In Pāli: parāmasa, derived from parāmasati,
to touch, to hold on to, to be attached or fall a victim to.}:
because of diṭṭhi one takes for permanent what is impermanent, one
takes for self what is not self. Ignorance covers up the true nature
of realities and wrong view sees them wrongly, in a distorted way.
Diṭṭhi is a factor of the wrong Path. If one follows the wrong Path
defilements cannot be eradicated and thus there will be no end to the
cycle of birth and death. Because of diṭṭhi someone may believe that
his wrong practice can lead to purification of defilements. In the
scriptures we read about people in the Buddha's time who followed
different ways of wrong practice; they behaved like a dog or like a
cow, because they thought that such practices would lead to
purification@footnote{This is ``clinging to rules and ritual'',
sīlabbatupādāna. See Dialogues of the Buddha III, no. 24, Mystic
Wonders, I, 7.}. So long as diṭṭhi has not been eradicated there are
conditions for deviating from the right Path, even though one may have
theoretical understanding of the right Path. The Buddha taught that
all realities which appear through the six doors can be object of
mindfulness. One may be inclined to think that it is not possible to
know nāma and rūpa which appear now, in daily life. Some people
believe that they have to follow certain rules with regard to the
development of satipaṭṭhāna, such as, for example, refraining from
reading or talking. They think that they have to go to a quiet place
where there is no noise, in order to have less akusala cittas. In the
beginning we all may be inclined to believe that we should not be
aware of akusala dhammas, but also akusala dhammas have
characteristics which can be known and understood. If they are not
known as they are, as nāmas which arise because of their own
conditions, they cannot be eradicated. Even dullness or forgetfulness
of nāma and rūpa is a reality of daily life and it has a
characteristic which can be known. It is important to know the
difference between the moments of awareness and the moments of
forgetfulness. There is forgetfulness of realities very often but
sometimes mindfulness may arise and then we can learn the difference. 

The proximate cause of diṭṭhi is ``the desire not to see the
ariyans''@footnote{See ``The Mūlapariyāya Sutta and its Commentarial
Exegesis'', translated by Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi, BPS. Kandy, 1980. In
the commentary to this sutta (``The Root of Existence'', Middle Length
Sayings I, no. 1), in the ``Papañcasūdani'', it is explained that
``the desire not to see the ariyans'', or being without regard for the
ariyans, means that one does not realize the three characteristics of
impermanence, dukkha and anattā; that one does not attain the Dhamma
attained by the ariyans.}, being without regard for them. If one does
not listen to the Dhamma as it is explained by the ``good friend in
Dhamma'' and does not put it into practice, there are no conditions
for the development of right understanding. Instead of listening to
the right friend one may associate with the wrong person. We read in
the @emph{Book of Analysis} (Chapter 17, par901) about evil
friendship:

@quotation
Therein, what is ``having evil friends''? There are those persons who
are without confidence@footnote{Confidence in what is wholesome.}, of
wrong morality, without learning, mean, of no wisdom. That which is
dependence on, strong dependence on, complete dependence on,
approaching, approaching intimately, devotion to, complete devotion
to, entanglement with them. This is called having evil friends.

@end quotation

Those who have accumulations for the development of right
understanding have conditions to meet the right friend in the Dhamma
and those who have tendencies to wrong view are bound to associate
with people who have wrong view and thus they accumulate more and more
wrong view. 

Wrong view should be regarded as the ``highest fault''. Wrong view is
dangerous because it can lead to many kinds of evil. We read in the
@emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Ones, Chapter XVII):

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt to cause the
arising of evil states not yet arisen, or if arisen, to cause their
more-becoming and increase, as perverted view@dots{}

Monks, in one of perverted view evil states not yet arisen do arise,
and if arisen, are apt to grow and grow@dots{}

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt to cause the
non-arising of good states not yet arisen, or, if arisen, to cause
their waning, as perverted view@dots{}

Monks, in one of perverted view good states not yet arisen arise not,
or, if arisen, waste away@dots{}

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt to cause the
arising of perverted view, if not yet arisen, or the increase of
perverted view, if already arisen, as unsystematic
attention@footnote{Ayoniso manasikāra, unwise attention.}. 

In him who gives not systematic attention perverted view, if not
arisen, does arise, or, if already arisen, does increase@dots{}

Monks, I know not of any other single thing so apt, when body breaks
up after death, to cause the rebirth of beings in the Waste, the Way
of Woe, the Downfall, in Hell, as perverted view@dots{}

We read of each case that the opposite is true for right view. Further
on, in the same chapter, we read that wrong view is compared to a
nimbseed, the seed of a creeper or of a cucumber:

@quotation
@dots{}Whatsoever essence it derives from earth or water, all that
conduces to its bitterness, its acridity, its unpleasantness. What is
the cause of that? The ill nature of the seed. Just so, monks, in a
man of perverted view, all deeds whatsoever@dots{}conduce to Ill.
What is the cause of that? Monks, it is perverted view.

@end quotation

Right view is compared to a seed of sugar-cane, paddy or grape:
``whatsoever essence it derives from earth or water, all that conduces
to its sweetness, pleasantness and delicious flavour.'' Even so in a
man who has right view, all deeds conduce to happiness.

In order to have more understanding of the implications of this sutta
we should consider the difference between the life of the non-ariyan
and the life of the sotāpanna. The non-ariyan who has not eradicated
wrong view has conditions to commit akusala kamma patha which can lead
to an unhappy rebirth and thus he is in a dangerous situation. The
sotāpanna, who has eradicated wrong view, has no conditions anymore to
transgress the five precepts, he has no conditions anymore to commit
akusala kamma patha which can cause an unhappy rebirth. He has
eradicated stinginess and jealousy, he is full of generosity. When one
does not cling anymore to the concept of self and sees realities as
they are, this will bear on one's actions, speech and thoughts. 

Diṭṭhi does not arise with every type of citta. Diṭṭhi is connected
with clinging, it arises only with @emph{lobha-mūla-citta}. There are
four types of lobha-mūla-citta which are accompanied by diṭṭhi
(diṭṭhigata-sampayutta), and of these types two are accompanied by
pleasant feeling (somanassa) and two by indifferent feeling (upekkhā).
They can be ``unprompted'' (asaṅkhārika, not induced by someone else
or oneself) or they can be ``prompted'' (sasaṅkhārika, induced by
someone else or by oneself)@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily Life,
Chapter 4.}. Diṭṭhi which arises with lobha-mūla-citta always stands
for wrong view, micchā-diṭṭhi.

There are many kinds of wrong views and they are of different degrees.
Three kinds of wrong view are unwholesome courses of action, akusala
kamma patha, through the mind, and these are capable of causing an
unhappy rebirth. They are the following three views:

@enumerate 

@item
There is no result of kamma (natthika-diṭṭhi)

@item
There are no causes (in happening, ahetuka-diṭṭhi) 

@item
There
is no such thing as kamma (akiriya-diṭṭhi) 

@end enumerate

As regards the first view, this was taught by Ajita
Kesakambali@footnote{Middle Length Sayings II, no. 60, On the Sure,
401.}. He also taught that there is annihilation at death. 

The second view was taught by Makkhalī. He taught that there is no
cause for the depravity or purity of beings, that there is no human
effort and that all living creatures are ``bent by fate, chance and
nature''@footnote{Ibidem, 407, and see also Dialogues of the Buddha I,
no. 2, ``The Fruits of the Life of a Recluse'', 54.} . 

The third view was taught by Pūraṇa Kassapa@footnote{Middle Length
Sayings II, no. 60, 404.}. He denied that there is akusala kamma and
kusala kamma. The tormenting of others is not an evil deed according
to him.

Although these three views are distinct from each other, they are
nevertheless related. When one does not see kamma as cause one does
not see its result either, and when one does not see the result of
kamma, one does not see kamma as cause either@footnote{See also
Kindred Sayings III, Khandha-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Views, I,
par5-7, and Dialogues of the Buddha I, no. 2, 52-56, and Atthasālinī
I, Part III, Chapter V, 101.}. 

The above-mentioned three wrong views are akusala kamma patha through
the mind if one is firmly convinced about them. These three views in
particular are very dangerous, they can give rise to many evil deeds.

There are many other kinds of wrong views and, although they are not
akusala kamma patha, they are still dangerous. The scriptures often
refer to the @emph{eternalistic view} and to the
@emph{annihilationistic view}. Eternalism is the belief that there is
a ``self'' who is permanent. Annihilationism is the belief that there
is a ``self'' who will be annihilated after death. There is also a
``semi-eternalistic view'': one holds that some phenomena are eternal
while others are not. One may sometimes cling to the eternalistic view
and sometimes to the annihilistic view.

In the @emph{Brahma-jāla-sutta} (``The All-Embracing Net of
Views''@footnote{Translated with its commentary by Ven. Bodhi, BPS.
Kandy, 1978.}, The Dialogues of the Buddha I, no. 1) sixty-two kinds
of wrong view are mentioned. Of these there are eighteen speculative
theories concerning the past, and forty-four concerning the future.
There are speculative theories about the world being finite or
infinite, about the origin of the ``soul'' or the world. There are
speculations about good and evil and about nibbāna.

People of all times have been inclined to speculative theories and
also today we can see that such views still persist. When we speculate
about past lives and future lives we may cling to a ``self'' who
``travels'' from one life to another. We are so used to thinking in
terms of self. As regards annihilationism, those who believe that
there is a soul or self who will be annihilated after death do not
realize that the dying-consciousness which falls away is succeeded by
the rebirth-consciousness of the next life so long as there are
conditions for rebirth. Annihilationism is different from the wisdom
which sees the impermanence, the arising and falling away, of nāma and
rūpa. For the arahat there are no conditions for rebirth, his
dying-consciousness is not succeeded by rebirth-consciousness. This is
not annihilation, it is freedom from the cycle of birth and death. The
arahat has cultivated the right conditions for the attainment to this
freedom. 

When the wrong view of self has been eradicated one will not cling to
speculative theories anymore. But so long as one still believes in a
self, one is bound to cling to speculative theories. We all have
accumulated ``personality-belief'' or ``sakkaya-diṭṭhi''. We read in
the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings
about Citta, par3, Isidatta) that the monk Isidatta said to Citta, the
housefather:

@quotation

Herein, housefather, the untaught manyfolk, who discern not those who
are ariyans, who are unskilled in the ariyan doctrine, who are
untrained in the ariyan doctrine@dots{}they regard body as the self,
they regard the self as having body, body as being in the self, the
self as being in the body@dots{}

@end quotation

Thus, there are four kinds of the wrong view of personality-belief
with regard to ``body'', rūpa-kkhandha. The same is said about the
wrong views with regard to the four nāma-kkhandhas of feeling,
perception, the ``formations'' or ``activities'' and consciousness.
Since there are four kinds of the wrong view of personality-belief,
sakkāya-diṭṭhi, concerning each of the five khandhas, there are twenty
kinds of this wrong view in all@footnote{Dhammasangaṇi, par1003.}.
One may cling with wrong view to the idea of ``I see'', ``my body'',
``my will''. But they are only khandhas, conditioned elements which
arise and fall away.

There is wrong view with regard to nāmas such as seeing, hearing or
thinking, and also with regard to rūpas, such as hardness or visible
object. One may take a nāma such as seeing for self, and one may also
take visible object for a person or a thing which exists. When we take
things for self we do not see them as elements which can, one at a
time, be experienced through the appropriate doorway. Visible object
is only a kind of rūpa which can be experienced through the eyesense,
it is not a person or a thing, it falls away again. Sound is only a
kind of rūpa which can be experienced through the earsense, it is not
a person or a thing. Each citta which arises experiences one object at
a time through the appropriate doorway and then falls away, it is
quite different from the preceding citta. Seeing only sees, it does
not hear, it does not think. We read in the @emph{Book of Analysis}
(Chapter 16, Analysis of Knowledge, par763):

@quotation

``Do not experience each other's object'' means: Ear-consciousness
does not experience the object of eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness
does not experience the object of ear-consciousness either.
Nose-consciousness does not experience the object of
eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness does not experience the object of
nose-consciousness either. Tongue-consciousness does not experience
the object of eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness does not experience
the object of tongue-consciousness either. Body-consciousness does not
experience the object of eye-consciousness; eye-consciousness does not
experience the object of body-consciousness either@dots{}

@end quotation

One tends to cling to an idea of self who coordinates all the
different experiences. Someone may think that he can look at someone
else and listen to his words at the same time. The lists and
classifications which we find in the Abhidhamma are not meant to be
used only for theoretical understanding, they are meant to be used for
the practice. They are reminders to be aware of the reality which
appears now so that wrong view can be eradicated. When hearing appears
there can be awareness of its characteristic so that right
understanding can know it as it is: as only a type of nāma, not a
self, who hears. We may have doubts about the difference between the
characteristic of hearing and of the paying of attention to the
meaning of the sound. We are inclined to confuse all the six doorways.
But hearing does not experience the object of thinking. Intellectual
understanding of realities can condition the arising of mindfulness
but we are usually infatuated with pleasant objects and we reject
unpleasant objects, we forget to be mindful. For example, when we feel
hot, we have aversion and then we are forgetful of realities such as
heat, feeling or aversion. 

So long as wrong view has not been eradicated it can still arise when
there are conditions for its arising. Only through mindfulness will we
be able to know when it arises. When we think of concepts such as
people and things there is not necessarily wrong view. We can think of
a person with kusala citta, for example, when we have compassion for
him. Or we can think of a person with lobha-mūla-citta without wrong
view or with dosa-mūla-citta. 

Wrong view has to be eradicated first before other defilements can be
eradicated. As we have seen, the non-ariyan, who has not eradicated
wrong view, still has conditions to neglect the five precepts; he
still has conditions for killing, stealing, sexual misbehaviour, lying
and the taking of intoxicants, including alcoholic drinks. When we
understand that the clinging to the concept of self causes us many
problems in life, that it leads to what is unprofitable, we may see
the benefit of the development of right understanding. If we really
see the danger of wrong view, it can condition the arising of
mindfulness and thus right understanding can develop. Right
understanding can only develop if there is mindfulness now, not if we
merely think of ways how to have more mindfulness later on. 

@subsection Questions
@enumerate 

@item
What is an example of wrong practice which people may follow today?

@item
Why is the proximate cause of wrong view ``not to see ariyans''?

@item
What is the difference between annihilationism, the view that a self
will be annihilated after death, and the seeing of the impermanence of
conditioned phenomena?

@item
In which way can one think of past lives with
wrong view? 

@item
Personality view can be eradicated through
mindfulness of nāma and rūpa. Why is that so? 

@item
Why does one not
cling to speculative theories anymore when personality belief has been
eradicated? 

@item
When there is no awareness is there wrong view all
the time? 

@item
What is the difference between ignorance and wrong
view? 

@item
Why are the three kinds of wrong view which are akusala
kamma patha particularly dangerous? 

@item
Why is it wrong to believe
that we can see and hear at the same time? 

@item
Does the fact that
wrong view has not been eradicated have any influence on our morality
(sīla)? 

@end enumerate

@node Conceit
@chapter Conceit

@section Conceit (māna)

Conceit, māna, is another akusala cetasika. There is conceit or pride
when we consider ourselves important. Because of conceit we may
compare ourselves with others. There can be conceit when we think
ourselves better, equal or less than someone else. We may believe that
there can be conceit only when we think ourselves better than someone
else, but this is not so. There can be a kind of upholding of
ourselves, of making ourselves important, while we compare ourselves
with someone else, no matter in what way, and that is conceit. 

We read in the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1116):

@quotation
What is the Fetter of conceit?

Conceit at the thought ``I am the better man''; conceit at the thought
``I am as good (as they)''; conceit at the thought ``I am lowly''- all
such sort of conceit, overweening conceitedness, loftiness,
haughtiness, flaunting a flag, assumption, desire of the heart for
self-advertisement---this is called conceit.

@end quotation

The three ways of comparing oneself with others may occur in someone
who is actually superior, in someone who is actually equal and in
someone who is actually inferior. Under this aspect there are nine
kinds of conceit@footnote{Book of Analysis par962 and Atthasālinī II,
Book II, Part II, Summary, par Chapter II, 372.}. 

There is no need for comparing, no matter whether we are in fact
superior, equal or inferior. We accumulate more akusala whenever we
make ourselves important in comparing ourselves with others, no matter
under what aspect.

Even when we do not compare ourselves with someone else we may find
ourselves important and then there is conceit. Conceit always goes
together with attachment, with clinging. It can arise with the four
types of lobha-mūla-citta which are not accompanied by wrong view.
Conceit and wrong view are different realities which do not arise at
the same time. When one takes a reality for permanent or for self
there is wrong view and there cannot be at the same time conceit,
which is pride or self-assertion. This does not mean that there is
conceit every time lobha-mūla-citta without wrong view arises.
Lobha-mūla-citta without wrong view may sometimes be accompanied by
conceit, sometimes not. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter III, 256) gives the
following definition of conceit:
@dots{}Herein conceit is fancying (deeming, vain imagining). It has
haughtiness as characteristic, self-praise as function, desire to
(advertise self like) a banner as manifestation, greed dissociated
from opinionatedness as proximate cause, and should be regarded as (a
form of) lunacy.

Attachment is the proximate cause of conceit, but it is attachment
which is dissociated from wrong view (diṭṭhigata-vippayutta). As we
have seen, conceit does not arise together with wrong view; it arises
with lobha-mūla-citta which is dissociated from wrong view. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 168) gives a similar definition, but it
mentions as manifestation of conceit ``vaingloriousness'' and it does
not mention the desire to advertise oneself like a
banner@footnote{Compare also Dhammasangaṇi par1116, and the
explanation of it in the Atthasālinī, Book II, Summary, Chapter II,
372.}. 

In the definition of the @emph{Atthasālinī} conceit as desire for
self-advertisement is compared to the desire for a banner. A banner is
hoisted into the air so that everyone can see it. We tend to find
ourselves important, to uphold ourselves.

Conceit is like a lunacy or madness. Although there is no need for
self-advertisement or for comparing ourselves with others we still do
so, because conceit has been accumulated. The study of akusala dhammas
is most helpful. If we do not know what conceit is and in which cases
it can arise, we will accumulate more and more conceit without
realizing it.

So long as conceit has not been eradicated there are many
opportunities for its arising. It arises more often than we would
think. The @emph{Book of Analysis} (Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17, par832)
gives a very revealing list of the objects on account of which pride
and conceit can arise@footnote{Pride is the translation of ``mada'',
which literally means intoxication. In par843, 844, the same list of
objects is mentioned as being objects for pride (māna) and conceit. In
par845 pride is defined in the same way as conceit.}: 

Pride of birth; pride of clan; pride of health; pride of youth; pride
of life; pride of gain; pride of being honoured; pride of being
respected; pride of prominence; pride of having adherents; pride of
wealth; pride of appearance; pride of erudition; pride of
intelligence; pride of being a knowledgeable authority; pride of being
(a regular) alms collector; pride of being not despised; pride of
posture (bearing); pride of accomplishment; pride of popularity; pride
of being moral; pride of jhāna; pride of dexterity; pride of being
tall; pride of (bodily) proportion; pride of form; pride of (bodily)
perfection@dots{}

All these objects can be a source of intoxication and conceit and we
should consider them in daily life, that is why they are enumerated.
Conceit can arise on account of each of the objects which are
experienced through the senses. When we experience a pleasant object
through one of the senses we may have conceit because of that; we may
think ourselves superior in comparison with someone else who did not
receive such a pleasant object. At that moment we forget that the
experience of pleasant objects through the senses is only vipāka,
conditioned by kamma. Thus, there is no reason to be proud of a
pleasant experience. But ignorance covers up the truth, it conditions
the arising of all sorts of akusala dhammas. Conceit can arise not
only on account of the objects experienced through the senses, but
also on account of the senses themselves. When we see someone who is
blind there may be pride on account of our eyesense. 

One may be proud because of one's birth, because of the family into
which one is born. Or conceit may arise on account of the race one
belongs to, on account of one's nationality or the colour of one's
skin. Some people may find the colour of their skin better that the
colour of someone else's skin. That is conceit. Conceit may also arise
because of beauty, possessions, rank or work. Or because of one's
skills, knowledge, education or wisdom. There may be the wish to
``advertise'' oneself because of these things. We like to be honoured
and praised and the worst thing which can happen to us is to be
forgotten, to be overlooked. We think of ourselves as ``somebody'' and
we do not want to be treated as ``nobody''. Our actions, speech and
thoughts are often motivated by an idea of competition; we may not
want other people to be better than we are, even with regard to kusala
and right understanding.

The ``Book of Analysis'' classifies conceit in many different ways in
order to show different aspects. We read, for example, about
``self-disrespect conceit'' (omāna, par881). When someone has
self-disdain or self-contempt he still upholds himself and finds
himself important. There is also ``over-estimating conceit''. Someone
may erroneously think that he has attained jhāna or realized stages of
wisdom and have conceit about it. We read in the @emph{Book of
Analysis} (Chapter 17, par882) about over-estimating conceit
(adhimāna):

@quotation
Therein, what is ``over-estimating conceit''? In not having reached,
there is perception of having reached; in not having done, there is
perception of having done; in not having attained, there is perception
of having attained; in not having realized, there is perception of
having realized; that which is similar, conceit, being conceited, the
state of being conceited, loftiness, haughtiness, (flaunting a) flag,
assumption, desire of consciousness for a banner. This is called
over-estimating conceit.
@end quotation

There are many forms of conceit. Conceit has been accumulated for so
long and it is bound to arise time and again. When we are dissatisfied
with the way other people treat us there are bound to be moments of
aversion, but there may also be moments of conceit. We find ourselves
important and then we suffer again from desire for self-advertisement;
we want to be esteemed. We may be conceited about erudition, about
``being a knowledgeable authority'', as the ``Book of Analysis''
expressed it so accurately. We may want to prove our value to others
in the field of knowledge about Dhamma. Then we let the banner fly
again.

We tend to have prejudices about certain people, even about our
relatives, we may look down on them. We should find out whether we
have conceit when we are together with other people. If we understand
the disadvantage of all akusala dhammas, also of conceit, there are
conditions for the arising of wholesome qualities such as loving
kindness or compassion. We believe that it is mostly our anger and
aversion which are unpleasant for others, but when there is conceit
there is also lack of kindness and consideration for other people.
When there is loving kindness there is no opportunity for conceit.

There are many moments of forgetfulness and then we do not notice when
there is conceit. A moment of conceit, of upholding ourselves, can
arise so easily. For example, when we hear about the salary someone
else is earning, there may be a moment of comparing, of upholding
ourselves. Or, when one is driving the car and sees others waiting for
the bus, there may be a notion of ``I have a car, I am lucky'', a
short moment of comparing, instead of cultivating loving kindness and
compassion. We find such thoughts ugly and we do not like to admit
that we have them, but they arise because there are conditions for
their arising; conceit is a conditioned dhamma (saṅkhāra dhamma). We
should be sincere and investigate the realities which arise, including
akusala dhammas. This is the only way to see that they are non-self. 

When one is young, one may compare oneself with someone who is old.
When we see someone who is sick or who is about to die, we may be glad
that we are healthy and alive and there may be conceit about our
health. We are subject to old age, sickness and death at this very
moment. There is no need for comparing. Instead of conceit there could
be right understanding of the impermanence of all conditioned
realities.

Conceit is like a ``lunacy'', we are foolish when we have conceit.
Conceit is akusala dhamma, it is impure. When there is conceit there
is also ignorance which does not know the true nature of realities.
There is shamelessness, ahirika, which is not ashamed of akusala,
there is recklessness, anottappa, which does not see the danger of
akusala, and there is restlessness, uddhacca, which is confused and
prevents the citta from being stable in kusala. 

Conceit is eradicated only when arahatship has been attained. The
sotāpanna (who has attained the first stage of enlightenment), the
sakadāgāmī (who has attained the second stage of enlightenment) and
the anāgāmī (who has attained the third stage of enlightenment) still
have conceit. Even those who have eradicated the wrong view of self
and who have realized that what is called a ``person'' are only nāmas
and rūpas which arise and fall away, may still cling to nāma and rūpa
with conceit. Conceit has been accumulated for so long. One may think
``one's own'' nāmas and rūpas better, equal or less than someone
else's, even though one has realized that there is no self. 

All those who are not arahats, even the ariyans who have not attained
arahatship, have to develop satipaṭṭhāna until all akusala dhammas
have been eradicated. This reminds us to be aware of what appears now,
even if it is conceit. The akusala dhammas which arise can remind us
of the need to continue to be mindful even though we do not see much
progress. We should be grateful to the Buddha who taught us all
dhammas. If he had not taught about conceit we would not have known
that there are many opportunities for its arising. It is beneficial to
come to realize one's akusala dhammas.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Conceit arises with lobha-mūla-citta without
wrong view. Is there conceit every time such a type of
lobha-mūla-citta arises? 

@item
Why is there conceit when one thinks
oneself inferior to someone else? 

@item
The sotāpanna has eradicated
the wrong view of self. Why can he still have conceit?
@end enumerate

@node Aversion
@chapter Aversion

@section Aversion (dosa)


Dosa, aversion, is another akusala cetasika. When the citta dislikes
the object it experiences there is dosa, aversion. When there is dosa,
the feeling which accompanies the citta is always unpleasant feeling.
We do not like to feel unhappy and we want to suppress our unpleasant
feeling. However, dosa-mūla-citta arises when there are conditions for
its arising. We may try to suppress unpleasant feeling because we
cling to pleasant feeling; we are ignorant of the real cause of
unpleasant feeling and of the disadvantages of akusala.

We should study the factors which condition dosa-mūla-citta. The
scriptures and the commentaries show us many aspects of dosa and if we
study these aspects we will have more understanding of the
disadvantages and the danger of dosa. Right understanding sees the
danger of akusala and conditions kusala. It is more beneficial to have
right understanding of dosa than just trying to suppress it without
any understanding of it. 

There always seem to be numerous causes for dosa and they invariably
seem to be outside ourselves: other people's actions or unhappy events
which occur. However, the real cause is within ourselves. Dosa has
been accumulated and it can always find an object. We are attached to
pleasant objects and when we do not experience pleasant objects there
is bound to be dosa. When dosa arises it shows that the attachment
which conditions it must be very strong.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book I, Part IX, Chapter III, 257) defines
dosa as follows:
@dots{}It has flying into anger or churlishness as characteristic,
like a smitten snake; spreading of itself or writhing as when poison
takes effect, as function; or, burning that on which it
depends@footnote{Namely, its physical base, which is the heart-base.
The rūpa which is the physical base of all cittas other than the
sense-cognitions of seeing, hearing, etc., is called the heart-base.
See Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 17.} as function, like
jungle-fire; offending or injuring as manifestation, like a foe who
has got his chance; having the grounds of vexation as proximate cause,
like urine mixed with poison.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 171) gives a similar definition of
dosa@footnote{Compare also Dhammasangaṇi par418.}. 

We read that the characteristic of dosa is flying into anger like a
smitten snake. When a snake has been hit he is likely to become fierce
and attack. Dosa is aggressive, just like a snake which has been hit.
The function of dosa is spreading of itself or writhing as when poison
takes effect. When poison has been taken it affects the whole body and
it causes suffering. Dosa has likewise an ill effect, it is harmful.
The function of dosa is also compared to a jungle-fire which burns
that on which it depends. Dosa is destructive like a jungle-fire which
consumes the forest. The proximate cause of dosa are ``grounds for
annoyance, like urine mixed with poison''. Urine mixed with poison is
not liked by anybody, although urine was taken as a medicine in India.
It is useful to study the proximate cause of dosa, the ``grounds for
annoyance''. Dosa often arises on account of what others are doing or
saying to us or to someone else. Even a good deed done to someone else
can be a reason for annoyance if we dislike that person. We read in
the @emph{Book of Analysis} (Chapter 17, par960) about nine reasons
for dosa:

@quotation
Therein what are ``nine bases of vexation''? ``He has done me harm'',
thus vexation arises; ``He is doing me harm'', thus vexation arises;
``He will do me harm'', thus vexation arises; ``He has done harm,
@dots{}he is doing harm, @dots{}he will do harm to one dear and
pleasant to me'', thus vexation arises; ``He has done good, @dots{}he
is doing good, @dots{}he will do good to one not dear and not
pleasant to me'', thus vexation arises. These are nine bases of
vexation.
@end quotation

Dosa arises with two types of citta, of which one is ``unprompted''
(asaṅkhārika) and one ``prompted'' (sasaṅkhārika)@footnote{See
Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 6.}. There are many degrees of
dosa. It may be a slight aversion or it may be stronger, appearing as
moodiness, bad temper, anger or hate. When dosa is strong one may
speak harsh words or throw things about the house. One may feel
desperate and commit suicide, one may hit others and even commit
murder. When we hear about crimes other people have committed with
dosa, we wonder how it could happen. When strong dosa arises it can
lead to the committing of akusala kamma which we may not have thought
ourselves capable of. Strong dosa can even motivate ``heinous crimes''
(anantarika kamma) which produce an unhappy rebirth immediately after
the life during which one committed the crime has ended. We read about
five heinous crimes in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Fives,
Chapter 13, par9, Festering):

@quotation
Monks, five are lost in hell who lie festering, incurable. What five?

(By him) has his mother been deprived of life; his father; an arahat;
(by him), with evil thought, has the Tathāgata's blood been drawn; (by
him) has the Order been embroiled.

Verily, monks, these are the five lost in hell who lie festering,
incurable.

@end quotation

We should remember that all degrees of dosa are dangerous, even the
lesser degrees. If we do not develop right understanding we accumulate
more and more dosa without realizing it. Therefore, it is helpful to
study the different aspects of dosa. 

Dosa can motivate akusala kamma patha (unwholesome courses of action)
through body, speech and mind. The akusala kamma patha through body
which is killing is motivated by dosa. As to stealing, this can be
motivated by lobha or by dosa. It is motivated by dosa when one wants
to harm another person. Three of the four akusala kamma pathas through
speech, namely lying, slandering and idle talk, can be motivated by
lobha or by dosa. They are motivated by dosa when one wants to harm
someone else. The akusala kamma patha which is rude speech is
motivated by dosa. The akusala kamma patha through the mind which is
ill-will is motivated by dosa. This is the intention to hurt or harm
someone else. Akusala kamma brings sorrow both in this life and the
next. The person who has committed akusala kamma may become afraid of
the result it will bring and he has no peace of mind. Dosa is harmful
for mind and body. Because of dosa our appearance becomes ugly: we
may become red in the face, our features become unpleasant and the
corners of our mouth droop. If we remember that it is not considerate
to show others an unpleasant face it can condition patience instead of
dosa. There are many ill effects of dosa. It causes sleeplessness, the
loss of friends, the loss of one's good name, of prosperity and
wealth. And after this life has ended one may have an unhappy rebirth
because of dosa. 

We may not have dosa of the intensity to motivate the committing of
akusala kamma patha, but even dosa which is of a lesser degree can
condition unpleasant behaviour and speech. We can easily, before we
realize it, utter harsh speech to someone else. When there is dosa,
even if it is a slight annoyance, there is no loving kindness, no
consideration for other people's feelings. When, for example,
unexpected visitors arrive at a time we do not want to be disturbed,
we may be annoyed. At such a moment there is mental rigidity, we are
unable to adapt ourselves to a new situation with kindness and
hospitality. The @emph{Book of Analysis} (Chapter 17, par833) gives us
a short but very effective reminder in a section in which pairs of
realities are summed up (Twofold Summary):
@dots{}Absence of softness and inhospitably.

This statement is meant as a reminder to be aware of realities of
daily life. How true it is that inhospitably goes together with
absence of softness, with mental rigidity. However, although there may
be aversion at first when we are, for example, disturbed by unexpected
visitors, right understanding can change our attitude. We may see the
disadvantage of being inconsiderate to others and of absence of
softness, of gentleness. Then we can receive our guests with kindness
and we can see for ourselves that there is no longer mental rigidity
and harshness, but pliancy of mind. 

Dosa can also appear as fear. When there is fear one dislikes the
object which is experienced. Fear is harmful for mind and body. One
may have fear of people, of situations, of sickness, old age and
death. So long as dosa has not been eradicated it will always find an
object. 

People have different accumulations: some people may have aversion at
certain occasions while others do not. Dosa does not only arise
because of what other people do or don't do, it can arise on account
of any object experienced through one of the six doors. One may even
be cross with the rain, the sun or the wind. We read in the
@emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book II, Part II, Summary, Chapter II, 367):

@quotation
@dots{}``Or when vexation (springs up) groundlessly'' means anger
without reason; for example, someone gets angry saying ``it rains too
much'', ``it does not rain'', ``the sun shines too much'', ``it does
not shine''; gets angry when the wind blows, when it does not blow,
gets angry at being unable to sweep away the Bodhi leaves, at being
unable to put on his robe; he gets angry with the wind, in slipping he
gets angry with a tree-stump@dots{}
@end quotation

The Buddha compares someone who gets angry very easily with an open
sore. An open sore hurts at the slightest touch, it is foul and
unpleasant to look at. We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of
the Threes, Chapter III, par25, The open sore):

@quotation
@dots{}of what sort, monks, is the one whose mind is like an open
sore?

Herein a certain person is irritable and turbulent. When anything, no
matter how trifling, is said to him, he becomes enraged, he gets angry
and quarrelsome: he resents it and displays anger, hatred and
sulkiness. Just as, for instance, when a festering sore, if struck by
a stick or shard, discharges matter all the more, even so, monks, a
certain person@dots{}displays anger, hatred and sulkiness. This one
is called ``He whose mind is like an open sore''@dots{}

@end quotation

The Buddha then spoke about the ``lightning-minded'', the person who
has realized the four noble Truths but who is not yet arahat, and
about the ``diamond-minded'', the arahat. Just as a diamond can cut
everything, even a gem or a rock, even so has the arahat cut off,
destroyed, the ``āsavas''@footnote{``Intoxicants'', a group of
defilements.}. 

So long as we cling to the pleasant ``worldly conditions''
(loka-dhammas) of gain, fame, praise and well-being, we are bound to
have aversion when they change. They change all the time but we forget
that they are impermanent. When we lose possessions, when we do not
receive honour, when we are blamed or when we suffer pain, we have
aversion and sadness. Right understanding of realities, of kamma and
vipāka, can help us to be more even-minded about pleasant and
unpleasant things which happen to us. When we experience unpleasant
objects through the senses, it is caused by akusala kamma, by
unwholesome deeds which have been committed already, and nobody can
avoid akusala vipāka when it is the right time for its arising. When
we understand that aversion about akusala vipāka is not helpful, there
can be ``wise attention'' instead of ``unwise attention'' to the
objects which are experienced. There may be intellectual
understanding of realities but this understanding cannot eradicate
dosa and the other defilements. Only right understanding developed in
vipassanā can eradicate them.

Dosa can be temporarily eliminated by the development of calm. When
one sees the disadvantages of clinging to sensuous objects and one has
accumulations for the development of calm to the degree of jhāna, one
can be temporarily remote from sense-impressions. Rūpāvacara kusala
cittas (of ``fine material jhāna'') can produce result in the form of
rebirth in rūpa-brahma planes and arūpāvacara kusala cittas (of
immaterial jhāna) can produce results in the form of rebirth in
arūpa-brahma planes. Although lobha and moha can arise in these
planes@footnote{Except in the rūpa- brahma plane which is the
asañña-satta plane, the plane of ``unconscious beings'', where there
is only rūpa.}, there are no conditions for dosa. However, dosa
arises again when there is rebirth in one of the sensuous planes. As
we have seen, clinging to sense objects conditions dosa. Only when the
stage of the anāgāmī has been attained dosa has been eradicated. The
anāgāmī does not cling to sense objects and thus he has no conditions
for dosa.

Only if we develop right understanding of realities can dosa
eventually be eradicated. Right understanding sees dosa as it really
is: as saṅkhāra dhamma, conditioned dhamma, non-self. Through
mindfulness of dosa its characteristic can be known. We believe that
it is easy to recognize dosa, but we usually think of the concept
``dosa'' or ``aversion'', and then its characteristic will not be
known. We will still take it for ``my dosa'', instead of realizing
that it is only a kind of nāma which arises because of conditions. 

It may happen that we have so much aversion about our aversion and
about the unpleasant feeling which accompanies it, that we believe
that we cannot be mindful of the reality of the present moment. In
theory we know that there can be mindfulness of any reality which
appears now, but what about the practice? When we see the benefit of
right understanding of whatever reality appears, there are conditions
for the arising of mindfulness, even when it seems that we are not
``in the mood`` for it. 

It seems that we do not have hatred or anger, but this does not mean
that dosa has been eradicated. So long as there is still the latent
tendency of dosa, it can arise any time. We read in the @emph{Middle
Length Sayings} (I, no. 21, The Parable of the Saw) about Videhikā who
was calm so long as there was no opportunity for dosa. It seemed that
she had no dosa at all. She had an excellent reputation, she appeared
to be gentle, meek and calm. Her servant Kāḷiī wanted to test her and
she came to work later every day. Because of this Videhikā lost her
temper: she hit Kāḷiī on her head with the pin used for securing the
door bolt. Because of that she acquired an evil reputation. We read
that the Buddha said to the monks:

@quotation

Even so, monks, some monk here is very gentle, very meek, very
tranquil so long as disagreeable ways of speech do not assail him. But
when disagreeable ways of speech assail the monk it is then that he is
to be called gentle, is to be called meek, is to be called
tranquil@dots{}
@end quotation

The Buddha exhorted the monks to have a ``mind of friendliness'', even
if others spoke to them in a disagreeable way, even if low-down
thieves would carve them limb by limb with a double-handled saw. 

Those who have eradicated dosa, the anāgāmī and the arahat, never have
anger nor the slightest displeasure, even in circumstances which are
very difficult to bear, even when they have to endure sickness or
pain. 

We tend to have aversion when we have pain or when we are sick. When
an unpleasant object impinges on the bodysense, body-consciousness
accompanied by painful feeling experiences that object.
Body-consciousness is vipākacitta, it is in this case the result of
akusala kamma. Shortly afterwards in that process of cittas
dosa-mūla-cittas are likely to arise which experience that object with
aversion. It seems almost inevitable that aversion arises after the
body-consciousness which experiences an unpleasant object. In order to
have right understanding of the different phenomena which occur, it is
necessary to develop mindfulness of nāma and rūpa. There are many
different types of nāma and rūpa when we have pain and when we have
aversion about pain, and they can be objects of awareness one at a
time. Right understanding of nāma and rūpa will help us to bear great
pains and to be patient in case of sickness. If we begin to develop
right understanding of realities at this moment we accumulate
conditions for its arising when we are sick or when we are about to
die.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Is the suppression of unpleasant feeling
always done with kusala citta? 

@item
What are the proximate causes
for dosa? 

@item
When there are unpleasant ``worldly conditions'' we
are likely to have dosa. How can right understanding of kamma and
vipāka help us to have kusala citta instead of dosa? 

@item
Why is
there no dosa in the rūpa-brahma planes and in the arūpa-brahma
planes? 

@item
Why can dosa not be eradicated without developing right
understanding of nāma and rūpa? Why can it not be eradicated by just
developing loving kindness? 

@item
When we suffer from sickness and
when we are about to die what is the most beneficial thing that can be
done in order not to be overcome by dosa? What should be done if dosa
arises in such circumstances? 
@end enumerate

@node Envy Stinginess Regret
@chapter Envy, Stinginess, Regret

@section Introduction

There are three akusala dhammas which can arise only with
dosa-mūla-citta, citta rooted in aversion, namely: @emph{envy} (issā),
@emph{stinginess} (macchariya) and @emph{regret} (kukkucca). Aversion
tends to arise often, both in sense-door processes and in mind-door
processes, because we have accumulated so much aversion.
Dosa-mūla-citta is always accompanied by unpleasant feeling. We may
notice that we have aversion and unpleasant feeling, but we should
also come to know other defilements which can arise with
dosa-mūla-citta, namely: envy, stinginess and regret. These akusala
cetasikas can, one at a time, accompany dosa-mūla-citta. This does not
mean that dosa-mūla-citta is always accompanied by one of these three
akusala cetasikas. Sometimes dosa-mūla-citta is accompanied by one of
these three and sometimes it is not accompanied by any of them. I
shall now deal with these three akusala cetasikas.

@section Envy (issā)

As regards envy or jealousy, this can arise when someone else receives
a pleasant object. At such a moment we may wonder why he receives a
pleasant object and why we don't. Envy is always accompanied by
unpleasant feeling, because it can only arise with dosa-mūla-citta,
with the citta which dislikes the object which is experienced. We
dislike unpleasant feeling, but merely disliking it does not help us
to have kusala citta instead of akusala citta. We should know the
different types of defilements which can arise with akusala citta. It
is useful to study their characteristics, functions, manifestations
and proximate causes. When we see how ugly defilements are and when we
understand their danger, we are reminded to develop satipaṭṭhāna which
is the only way to eradicate them. There is no other way.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book I, Part IX, Chapter II, 257) gives
the following definition of envy:
@dots{}It has the characteristic of envying, of not enduring the
prosperity of others, the function of taking no delight in such
prosperity, the manifestation of turning one's face from such
prosperity, the proximate cause being such prosperity; and it should
be regarded as a fetter.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 172) gives a similar
definition@footnote{Compare also Dhammasangaṇi, par1121, and Vibhaṅga
par893.}. 

The proximate cause of envy is someone else's prosperity. When there
is jealousy one cannot stand it that others receive pleasant objects.
At that moment there cannot be ``sympathetic joy'' (muditā). We may be
jealous when someone else receives a gift, when he receives honour or
praise because of his good qualities or his wisdom. When there is
jealousy we do not want someone else to be happy and we may even wish
that he will lose the pleasant objects or the good qualities he
possesses. 

Envy is dangerous. When it is strong it can motivate akusala kamma
patha (unwholesome course of action) and this is capable of producing
an unhappy rebirth. One may, because of jealousy, even kill someone
else. 

We all have accumulated jealousy and thus it is bound to arise. It is
useful to notice the moments of jealousy, also when it is of a slight
degree. We may be jealous when someone else is praised. We want to be
praised ourselves and we do not want to be overlooked, we find
ourselves important. In reality there is no self, only nāma and rūpa
which arise because of their own conditions. The sotāpanna has right
understanding of realities, he knows that there is no person who can
receive or possess pleasant objects. He realizes that all experiences
are only conditioned realities which do not stay and do not belong to
a self. He has no more conditions for jealousy, he has eradicated it.

When we see the disadvantages of envy we will cultivate conditions for
having it less often. Sympathetic joy, muditā, is the opposite of
envy. Muditā is sympathetic joy in someone else's prosperity and
happiness. The Buddha taught us different ways of developing
wholesomeness and the development of sympathetic joy is one of them.
At first it may be difficult to rejoice in other people's happiness,
but when we appreciate the value of sympathetic joy there are
conditions for its arising. It can gradually become our nature to
rejoice in other people's happiness. When there is sympathetic joy,
the citta is kusala citta. Each kusala citta is accompanied by
non-attachment, alobha, non-hate, adosa, and it may be accompanied by
right understanding or without it. Envy cannot be eradicated by
sympathetic joy, even if we have many moments of it. Only right
understanding of nāma and rūpa can eventually eradicate envy.

@section Stinginess (macchariya) 

Stinginess or avarice, macchariya, is another akusala cetasika which
can arise with dosa-mūla-citta. It does not arise with every
dosa-mūla-citta, but when it arises it accompanies dosa-mūla-citta.
When there is stinginess there is also aversion towards the object
which is experienced at that moment and the feeling is unpleasant
feeling. Stinginess cannot arise with lobha-mūla-citta or with
moha-mūla-citta.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book I, Part IX, Chapter II, 257) gives
the following definition of avarice (meanness):

It has, as characteristic, the concealing of one's property, either
attained or about to be attained; the not enduring the sharing of
one's property in common with others, as function; the shrinking from
such sharing or niggardliness or sour feeling as manifestation; one's
own property as proximate cause; and it should be regarded as mental
ugliness.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 173) gives a similar definition. 

When there is stinginess there is a cramped state of mind, one cannot
stretch out one's hand in order to give a gift. The proximate cause of
avarice is one's own property, whereas, as we have seen, the proximate
cause of envy is someone else's prosperity. When there is avarice one
is unable to share what one has (or will acquire) with someone else.

There are five kinds of objects on account of which stinginess can
arise. We read in the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1122) in its definition
of the fetter of meanness:

@quotation
The five meannesses, (to wit) meanness as regards dwelling, families,
gifts, reputation, dhamma---all this sort of meanness, grudging, mean
spirit, avarice and ignobleness, niggardliness and want of generosity
of heart---this is called the fetter of meanness.
@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book II, Part II, Chapter II, 376), in its
explanation of the words of the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi}, states that the
mean person also hinders someone else from giving. Stinginess can
motivate one to try to persuade someone else, for example one's
husband or wife, to give less or not to give at all. We read in the
@emph{Atthasālinī} :

@example
@dots{}and this also has been said, 
Malicious, miserly, ignoble, wrong@dots{}
Such men hinder the feeding of the poor@dots{}

@end example
@quotation
A ``niggardly'' person seeing mendicants causes his mind to shrink as
by sourness. His state is ``niggardliness''. Another way (of
definition):- ``niggardliness is a ``spoon-feeding''. For when the pot
is full to the brim, one takes food from it by a spoon with the edge
bent on all sides; it is not possible to get a spoonful; so is the
mind of a mean person bent in. When it is bent in, the body also is
bent in, recedes, is not diffused---thus stinginess is said to be
niggardliness.

``Lack of generosity of heart'' is the state of a mind which is shut
and gripped, so that it is not stretched out in the mode of making
gifts, etc., in doing service to others. But because the mean person
wishes not to give to others what belongs to himself, and wishes to
take what belongs to others, therefore this meanness should be
understood to have the characteristic of hiding or seizing one's own
property, occurring thus: ``May it be for me and not for
another''@dots{}
@end quotation

As regards the five kinds of objects one can be stingy about@footnote{
Compare also Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17, par893, for these five kinds of
objects.}, the @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book II, Part II, Chapter II,
373-375) explains about these five kinds and mentions that there is no
stinginess if one does not want to share these things with a person
who will use them in the wrong way or with a bhikkhu who will disgrace
the Sangha.

As regards stinginess about dwelling, the ``dwelling'' can be a
monastery, a single room or any place where one stays, no matter
whether it is big or small. We can be stingy with regard to any place
where we are comfortable, such as a corner in a room or a seat. 

As regards stinginess about ``family'', this can be a family of
servitors to a monastery or one's relatives. A bhikkhu who is stingy
does not want another bhikkhu to approach a family he usually visits,
because he does not want to share with someone else the goods he
receives. We may be stingy not only with regard to things, but also
with regard to words of praise. For example, when we, together with
others, have accomplished a work of charity, we may only want to be
praised ourselves; we may not want to share honour and praise with
others, although they deserve to be praised as well. We should
scrutinize ourselves as to this form of stinginess; we should find out
whether it is easy for us to praise others. If we understand that
praising someone's virtues is an act of generosity, we will more often
remember to do this when the opportunity arises. When we praise
someone else there is no room for stinginess. There are many different
ways of kusala and in our daily life there are opportunities right at
hand for one kind of kusala or other, no matter whether we are alone
or with other people.

Someone may be stingy as to Dhamma. He may not want to share Dhamma
with others because he is afraid that they will acquire the same
amount of knowledge as he himself or even more. The sotāpanna who has
realized the four noble Truths, has eradicated all forms of
stinginess. He wishes everyone to know and realize the Dhamma he has
realized himself. Those who are non-ariyans may have stinginess as to
Dhamma. However, there may be good reasons for not teaching Dhamma.
One should not teach Dhamma to someone who is bound to abuse the
Dhamma and to interpret it wrongly, or to someone who will erroneously
take himself for an arahat because of his knowledge. There is no
stinginess if one does not teach Dhamma to such persons, because one
acts then out of consideration for the Dhamma or out of consideration
for people. 

In the ultimate sense there are no things we can possess, there are
only nāma and rūpa. If we remember this we can see that it is foolish
to think that realities which arise and fall away belong to us and
that we can keep them. Why are we stingy about what does not belong to
us? We cannot take our possessions, our money with us when we die.
Human life is so short and we waste many opportunities for kusala
because of our stinginess. In the absolute sense there is no self, no
person who can possess anything. Our life consists of nāma and rūpa
which arise and fall away. Life is actually one moment of experiencing
an object; this moment falls away and is succeeded by a next moment
which is different again. We cannot possess visible object or
hardness. They are only rūpas which do not stay and do not belong to
us. When understanding has been developed more there will be less
stinginess. The sotāpanna who sees nāma and rūpa as they are, as
impermanent and not self, has no more conditions for stinginess. 

We should find out why we are stingy. We do not want to give things
away because we fear that our possessions will decrease, but then we
are likely to suffer from the very things we are afraid of. The
experience of objects through the senses is vipāka, the result of
kamma. We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (I, Sagāthā-vagga,
Chapter I, The Devas, Part 4, par2, Avarice) that devas of the
Satullapa group came to see the Buddha and spoke to him about avarice
and generosity. One among them said:

@example

@dots{}That which the miser dreads, and hence gives not,
To him not giving just that danger it is:
Hunger and thirst---for this the thing he dreads---
Just this the doom that does befall the fool
In this and also in some other world.
Hence should he avarice suppress, and make
Offerings of charity, mastering the taint.
Sure platform in some other future world
Rewards of virtue on good beings wait.

@end example

The five kinds of avarice can motivate akusala kamma which is capable
of producing an unhappy rebirth or akusala vipāka in the course of
one's life: one may have to endure hardship, poverty, disease and
dishonour. The @emph{Atthasālinī}, in the section about meanness (375)
speaks about the unpleasant results produced by the five kinds of
stinginess and states about the results of stinginess with regard to
praise and to Dhamma:

@quotation
@dots{}one who extols his own praises and not those of others; who
mentions this and that fault of anyone saying, ``What praise does he
deserve?'' and does not impart any doctrine of learning to him,
becomes ugly, or has a mouth dripping with saliva@dots{}

@end quotation

The person who has a mouth dripping with saliva cannot speak in a
pleasant way and is ugly to look at, therefore people do not like to
listen to him. Further on the @emph{Atthasālinī} states that the
result of stinginess with regard to praise can also be that one is
born without beauty or reputation. Owing to stinginess with regard to
Dhamma one may also be reborn in one of the hell planes, the ``hot-ash
hell''. 

So long as one has not become a sotāpanna there are opportunities for
the arising of stinginess. Some people have stinginess more often than
others, or someone may have stinginess as to certain objects, such as
money, but not as to other objects, such as praise or Dhamma; it all
depends on people's accumulations. But even if someone is very stingy
by nature, his attitude can be changed. Through right understanding
one can learn to develop generosity.

We read in the commentary to the @emph{Sudhābhojana-Jātaka} (Jātakas,
Book V, no. 535) about a monk in the Buddha's time who practised the
utmost generosity. He gave away his food and even if he received
something to drink which was merely sufficient to fill the hollow of
his hand, he would, free from greed, still give it away. But formerly
he used to be so stingy that ``he would not give so much as a drop of
oil on the tip of a blade of grass''. The Buddha spoke about one of
this monk's former lives when he was the miser Kosiya and this is the
story of the ``Sudhābhojana Jātaka''.

Kosiya did not keep up the tradition of almsgiving of his ancestors
and lived as a miser. One day he had craving for rice-porridge. When
his wife suggested that she would cook rice-porridge not only for him
but also for all the inhabitants of Vārānasi, he felt ``just as if he
had been struck on the head with a stick''. As we have read in the
definition of avarice in the @emph{Atthasālinī}, its manifestation is
``the shrinking from such sharing, or niggardliness or sour
feeling@dots{}'' When there is avarice there is always unpleasant
feeling, there cannot be any happiness.

We then read in the Jātaka that Kosiya's wife subsequently offered to
cook for a single street, for the attendants in his house, for the
family, for the two of them, but he turned down all her offers. He
wanted to cook porridge only for himself, in the forest, so that
nobody else could see it. We should remember that the characteristic
of stinginess is the concealing of one's property. One wants to hide
it because one does not want to share it.

We then read in the Jātaka that the Bodhisatta who was at that time
the god Sakka wanted to convert him and came to him with four
attendants disguised as brahmins. One by one they approached the miser
and begged for some of his porridge. Sakka spoke the following stanza,
praising generosity (387):

@example

From little one should little give, from moderate means likewise,
From much give much: of giving nought no question can arise.
This then I tell thee, Kosiya, give alms of that is thine:
Eat not alone, no bliss is his that by himself shall dine,
By charity thou mayst ascend the noble path divine.

@end example

Kosiya reluctantly offered some porridge to them. Then one of the
brahmins changed himself into a dog. The dog made water and a drop of
it fell on Kosiya's hand. Kosiya went to the river to wash and then
the dog made water in Kosiya's cooking pot. When Kosiya threatened him
he changed into a ``blood horse'' and pursued Kosiya. Then Sakka and
his attendants stood in the air and Sakka preached to Kosiya out of
compassion and warned him of an unhappy rebirth. Kosiya came to
understand the danger of stinginess. He gave away all his possessions
and became an ascetic.

At the end of the Jātaka the Buddha said: ``Not now only, monks, but
of old also I converted this niggardly fellow who was a confirmed
miser''. 

Right understanding sees the danger of akusala and it conditions the
development of kusala. When we still cling so much to our possessions
and are stingy with regard to them it will be all the more difficult
to become detached from the self. We should develop generosity in
giving away useful things and also in praising those who deserve
praise. We should see the value of all kinds of kusala. When the citta
is kusala citta there is no stinginess, but stinginess can only be
eradicated by the development of right understanding of any reality
which appears.

@section Regret (kukkucca)

@emph{Regret} or @emph{worry,} kukkucca, is another akusala cetasika
which can arise with dosa-mūla-citta. It does not arise with every
dosa-mūla-citta, but when it arises, it arises only with
dosa-mūla-citta. It cannot arise with lobha-mūla-citta or with
moha-mūla-citta. When there is regret there is also aversion towards
the object which is experienced at that moment. Therefore, the feeling
which accompanies kukkucca is always unpleasant feeling.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book II, Part IX, Chapter III, 258) gives
the following definition of kukkucca:

@quotation
@dots{}It has repentance as characteristic, sorrow at deeds of
commission and omission as function, regret as manifestation, deeds of
commission and omission as proximate cause, and it should be regarded
as a state of bondage.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 174) gives a similar definition.

The characteristic of kukkucca is repentance. Repentance is generally
considered a virtue, but the reality of kukkucca is not wholesome, it
arises with dosa-mūla-citta. Kukkucca which ``regrets'' the commission
of evil and the omission of kusala is different from wholesome
thinking about the disadvantages of akusala and the value of kusala.
The conventional term ``worry'' which is also used as translation of
kukkucca may not be clear either. When we say that we worry, it may
not be the reality of kukkucca but it may be thinking with aversion
about an unpleasant object without there being kukkucca. For example,
we may worry about the way how to solve a problem in the future; this
kind of worry is not the reality of kukkucca. 

If we take note of the proximate cause of kukkucca we will better
understand what kukkucca is. The proximate cause of kukkucca is
akusala kamma through body, speech and mind which has been committed
and also kusala kamma through body, speech and mind which has been
omitted. We read in the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1304 and 1305):

@quotation

Which are the states that conduce to remorse?:

Misconduct in act, word and thought. Besides, all bad states conduce
to remorse.

Which are the states that do not conduce to remorse?

Good conduct in act, word and thought. Besides, no good states
(absence of good states) conduce to remorse.

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book II, Part II, Chapter II, 389, 390)
explains this passage of the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi}: 

In the exposition of the couplet of what ``conduces to remorse''
(@emph{Dhammasangaṇi}, par1304), ``remorse'' arises from what has been
done and what has been left undone. Acts of misconduct burn from
commission, acts of good conduct burn from omission. Thus a person
feels remorse (literally: burns) at the thought, ``I have misconducted
myself'', ``I have left undone the right act''; ``I have spoken
amiss'', @dots{}I have left undone the right thoughts''. Similarly
with what does not ``conduce to remorse''. Thus a person doing good
does not feel remorse over acts of commission or omission.

When we have slandered or spoken harsh words there may be remorse
about it afterwards. There can also be remorse about our
neglectfulness of kusala, we often waste opportunities for kusala. We
may be stingy when there is an opportunity for giving or for praising
someone who deserves praise. Or we are neglectful as to the
development of right understanding of realities. As a consequence of
our omission of kusala regret may arise. 

We read in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (III, 129, Discourse on
Fools and the Wise) about the anguishes which may be experienced by a
fool who has done wrong deeds through body, speech and mind. He
experiences anguish because other people talk about his akusala, and
thus he acquires a bad name. He fears punishment for his evil deeds
and therefore he experiences anguish. Moreover, he has remorse because
of his evil deeds and his neglectfulness as to kusala. We read:

And again, monks, while a fool is on a chair or bed or lying on the
ground, at such a time those evil deeds that he has formerly wrongly
done by body, speech and thought rest on him, lie on him, settle on
him. Monks, as at eventide the shadows of the great mountain peaks
rest, lie and settle on earth, so, monks, do these evil deeds that the
fool has formerly wrongly done by body, speech and thought rest, lie
and settle on him as he is on a chair or bed or lying on the ground.
Thereupon, monks, it occurs thus to the fool: ''Indeed what is lovely
has not been done by me, what is skilled has not been done, no refuge
against fearful (consequences) has been made, evil has been done,
cruelty has been done, violence has been done. Insofar as there is a
bourn for those who have not done what is lovely, have not done what
is skilled, have not made a refuge against fearful (consequences), who
have done evil, cruelty and violence, to that bourn I am going
hereafter''. He grieves, mourns, laments, beats his breast, wails and
falls into disillusionment@dots{}

The committing of akusala kamma and the omitting of kusala kamma is a
condition for remorse and because of this remorse one is unhappy, one
does not have peace of mind. Akusala kamma can produce an unhappy
rebirth and also unpleasant experiences through the senses in the
course of life. 

Regret is one of the ``hindrances'' (nīvaraṇas) and as such it forms a
pair with restlessness, uddhacca. The ``hindrances'' are akusala
cetasikas which hinder the performing of kusala. When regret arises
there cannot be kusala at that moment.

We read in the definition of regret that it should be regarded as a
state of bondage. The citta with regret is not free, it is enslaved.
At such a moment there is no peacefulness, no happiness. 

If one has not studied the Dhamma and if one does not know about the
different types of citta which arise there are less conditions for the
cultivation of kusala. If kusala is not developed there are more
akusala cittas and thus also more opportunities for the arising of
remorse. 

The monk who has to observe the rules of the Vinaya may have worry
with regard to his observance of these rules. He may have scruples and
he may even wrongly assume that he transgresses a rule or that he
observes a rule. Worry and doubt may arise because of this. We read in
the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (Chapter IX, par1161):

@quotation

What is worry (kukkucca)?

Consciousness of what is lawful in something that is unlawful;
consciousness of what is unlawful in something that is
lawful@footnote{Referring to rules pertaining to things such as kinds
of food or the hour of the meal.} ; consciousness of what is immoral
in something that is moral; consciousness of what is moral in
something that is immoral---all this sort of worry, fidgeting,
overscrupulousness, remorse of conscience, mental scarifying- this is
what is called worry.

@end quotation

It is hard to eradicate regret. Even the sotāpanna may still have
regret, although he has no conditions for regret on account of akusala
kamma which is of the intensity to produce an unhappy rebirth; he has
eradicated the tendencies to such evil deeds. The sotāpanna still has
lobha-mūla-citta, dosa-mūla-citta and moha-mūla-citta. He does not
have dosa-mūla-citta with envy or stinginess, but dosa-mūla-citta
still arises, and sometimes it may be accompanied by regret. He may
speak harshly, or he may have laziness as to the performing of kusala,
and on account of this regret can arise. The sotāpanna is bound to
have regret less often than those who are non-ariyans. When one has
not attained enlightenment one may be often inclined to brood over the
past. The sotāpanna has developed the four ``Applications of
Mindfulness'', and thus he has less conditions than the non-ariyan to
worry about the past. When regret arises he realizes that it is only a
conditioned dhamma, saṅkhāra dhamma, and he does not take it for self.

We still consider regret as ``my regret''. We regret our akusala and
our lack of mindfulness. If we realize that thinking with worry is not
helpful it may be a condition to cultivate kusala. When there is
forgetfulness of realities we should remember that is a conditioned
reality, not self. We should know the characteristics of akusala
dhammas which arise as not self. Then there will be less regret. 

According to the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XXII, 71) the anāgāmī has
eradicated regret completely@footnote{According to the Atthasālinī
(Book II, Part II, Chapter II, 384) the sotāpanna has eradicated
regret. The sotāpanna has eradicated regret pertaining to coarse
defilements, whereas the anāgāmī has eradicated regret which also
pertains to subtle defilements.}. For him dosa-mūla-citta does not
arise anymore and thus regret cannot arise either. 

We should not only know the characteristic of dosa, but also the
characteristics of other akusala cetasikas which can arise with
dosa-mūla-citta: envy, stinginess and regret. As we have seen,
dosa-mūla-citta can be accompanied by only one of these three akusala
cetasikas at a time; they cannot arise simultaneously. They may or may
not arise when dosa-mūla-citta arises. Sometimes there is
dosa-mūla-citta without any of these three akusala cetasikas,
sometimes there is dosa-mūla-citta accompanied by one of these three.
We will come to know the characteristics of the different defilements
more clearly by being mindful of them. 


@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
Why can envy arise only with dosa-mūla-citta?

@item
Why is it helpful to cultivate the wholesome quality of sympathetic joy (muditā)?

@item
Who has eradicated envy?

@item
Can suffering from hunger and thirst be a result of stinginess?

@item
Can those who are very stingy by nature learn to become less stingy? In what way?

@item
Who has eradicated stinginess?

@item
What is the proximate cause of regret?

@item
In what way can akusala kamma cause sorrow both in this world and the next?

@item
Who has eradicated regret completely?
@end enumerate



@node Sloth Torpor and Doubt
@chapter Sloth, Torpor and Doubt

@section Sloth (thīna), Torpor (middha)

Thīna and middha are two akusala cetasikas which always arise
together, they form a pair. Thīna can be translated as sloth or
stolidity and middha as torpor or languor. When there are sloth and
torpor one has no energy for kusala. In order to have more
understanding of sloth and torpor we should study their
characteristics, functions, manifestations and their proximate cause,
and we should know which types of citta they can accompany. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book I, Part IX, Chapter II, 255) states
about sloth and torpor: ``Absence of striving, difficulty through
inability, is the meaning.'' We then read the following definitions of
sloth and torpor:

@quotation

The compound ``sloth-torpor'' is sloth plus torpor; of which sloth has
absence of, or opposition to striving as characteristic, destruction
of energy as function, sinking of associated states as manifestation;
torpor has unwieldiness as characteristic, closing the doors of
consciousness as function, shrinking in taking the object, or
drowsiness as manifestation; and both have unsystematic thought, in
not arousing oneself from discontent and laziness (or indulgence), as
proximate cause.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 167) gives a similar definition. The
@emph{Dhammasangaṇi} calls sloth (thīna) indisposition and
unwieldiness of mind (par1156) and torpor (middha) indisposition and
unwieldiness of cetasikas (par1157) @footnote{See Vibhaṅga par547 and
Atthasālinī II, Book II, Part II, Chapter II, 377.}. When there are
sloth and torpor there is no wieldiness of mind which is necessary for
the performing of kusala. Instead there are mental stiffness and
rigidity, mental sickness and laziness.

As we have seen, the @emph{Atthasālinī} states that the characteristic
of sloth is opposition to ``striving'', to energy. Also akusala citta
is accompanied by energy (viriya), but this is wrong effort; it is
different from right effort which accompanies kusala citta. When there
are sloth and torpor there is no energy, no vigour to perform dāna, to
observe sīla, to listen to Dhamma, to study the Dhamma or to develop
calm, no energy to be mindful of the reality which appears now. This
does not mean that whenever there is lack of mindfulness sloth and
torpor arise. As we will see, they do not arise with all types of
akusala citta.

As regards torpor, its characteristic is unwieldiness and its function
is closing the doors of consciousness. It obstructs the performing of
kusala, it ``oppresses@dots{}, it injures by means of unwieldiness'', the
@emph{Atthasālinī} (378) explains. The manifestation of sloth is
``sinking of associated states'', it causes the citta and cetasikas it
accompanies to decline. The manifestation of torpor is ``shrinking in
taking the object'' or drowsiness. The @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1157)
calls torpor (middha) ``drowsiness, sleep, slumbering, somnolence''.
The @emph{Atthasālinī} (378) adds to drowsiness: ``Drowsiness makes
blinking of the eyelashes, etc.'' The arahat has eradicated sloth and
torpor. He can still have bodily tiredness and he may sleep, but he
has no sloth and torpor @footnote{Atthasālinī II, Book II, Part II,
Chapter II, 378.}. 

We may be inclined to think that sloth and torpor arise only when
there is sleepiness, but when we study the types of citta which can be
accompanied by sloth and torpor we will see that there can be many
moments of them, also when we do not feel sleepy. 

As we have seen, the proximate cause of sloth and torpor is
``unsystematic thought, in not arousing oneself from discontent and
laziness''. When there are sloth and torpor there is ``unsystematic
thought'', that is, unwise attention (ayoniso manasikāra) to the
object which is experienced. At such moments we do not realize that
life is short and that it is urgent to develop all kinds of kusala and
in particular right understanding of realities. We all have moments
that there is no energy to read the scriptures or to consider the
Dhamma. We may be overcome by boredom, we are not interested to study
and to consider the Dhamma, or we make ourselves believe that we are
too busy. Sometimes, however, we may realize that even the reading of
a few lines of the scriptures can be most beneficial, that it can
remind us to be aware of realities which appear. We should remember
that when there are sloth and torpor we are not merely standing still
as to the development of kusala, but we are ``sinking'', we are going
``downhill'', since there is opportunity for the accumulation of more
akusala. If we realize that the opportunity to develop right
understanding of the present moment is only at the present moment, not
at some moment in the future, there can be conditions for mindfulness
and then there is ``wise attention'' instead of ``unwise attention''. 

Sloth and torpor can arise only with akusala cittas which are
``prompted'', @emph{sasaṅkhārika.} Some types of cittas are
``unprompted'' or not induced (asaṅkhārika) and some types are
``prompted'', instigated or induced. The inducement can be done by
someone else or by oneself. The cittas which are prompted are,
according to the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 91) ``sluggish and urged
on''. Thus, sloth and torpor which are lazy and sluggish with regard
to the performing of kusala arise only with the akusala cittas which
are prompted @footnote{In A Manual of Abhidhamma, in a footnote to
akusala cetasikas, Ven. Narada explains that since sloth and torpor
lack urge they cannot arise with cittas which are unprompted, cittas
which are ``keen and active''.}. They can arise with the @emph{four
types of lobha-mūla-citta} which are @emph{sasaṅkhārika} and with
@emph{one type of dosa-mūla-citta}, the type which is
@emph{sasaṅkhārika} @footnote{There are eight types of
lobha-mūla-citta, of which four are unprompted and four prompted;
there are two types of dosa-mūla-citta, of which one is prompted and
one unprompted. See Abhidhamma in Daily Life Chapter 4 and 6.}. This
does not mean that they arise every time the akusala citta is
``prompted''; they may or may not arise with these five types of
akusala citta. The two types of moha-mūla-citta are not ``prompted'',
they cannot be accompanied by sloth and torpor.

Sloth and torpor can arise together with @emph{wrong view},
@emph{diṭṭhi}, and in this case they accompany lobha-mūla-citta which
is associated with wrong view and prompted. Sloth and torpor can arise
together with conceit, māna, and in this case they accompany
lobha-mūla-citta which is without wrong view and prompted
@footnote{Four of the eight types of lobha-mūla-citta are associated
with wrong view, diṭṭhi, and four are without wrong view. Conceit can
accompany lobha-mūla-citta without wrong view, but this is not always
so.}. Sloth and torpor which arise with lobha-mūla-citta may be
accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling. 

Sloth and torpor can arise together with envy (issā), stinginess
(macchariya) or regret (kukkucca) which, one at a time, can accompany
dosa-mūla-citta, and in that case the dosa-mūla-citta is prompted.
The accompanying feeling is unpleasant feeling. 

Sloth and torpor are hard to eradicate. Even the sotāpanna, the
sakadāgāmī and the anāgāmī still have sloth and torpor. Only the
arahat has eradicated them completely. We are likely to have many
moments of sloth and torpor, but it is not easy to know when they
occur. We should remember that, when there are defilements such as
wrong view, conceit, envy, stinginess or regret, sloth and torpor can
arise as well if the citta they accompany is prompted. Sloth and
torpor cause mental unwieldiness and mental indisposition or sickness,
so that there is no vigour, no energy for kusala. Sloth and torpor are
harmful, they are among the ``hindrances'' which prevent us from
performing dāna, observing sīla or applying ourselves to mental
development. 

The Buddha told the monks to be moderate in eating and warned them not
to be attached to the ``ease of bed'', because such attachments give
rise to sloth and torpor which are mental sickness and which destroy
energy for kusala. We read in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (I, no.
16, Discourse on Mental Barrenness) that the Buddha, when he was
staying near Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove, spoke about ways of mental
barrenness and mental bondages. One of the mental bondages is
attachment to food and sleep. We read that the Buddha said:

And again, monks, a monk having eaten as much as his belly will hold,
lives intent on the ease of bed, on the ease of lying down, on the
ease of slumber. Whatever monk, having eaten as much as his belly will
hold, lives intent on the ease of bed, on the ease of lying down, on
the ease of slumber, his mind does not incline to ardour, to continual
application, to perseverance, to striving@dots{}

It is helpful, not only for monks, but also for laymen, to be reminded
of conditions for laziness as to kusala.

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Fives, Chapter VI,
par6, The preceptor) about a monk who complained to his preceptor
concerning his lack of energy for kusala:

@quotation

Now a certain monk approached his preceptor and said:

``My body, sir, is as it were drugged; the quarters are not seen by
me; things @footnote{Dhammas. The commentary, the ``Manorathapūraṇī'',
explains: samatha and vipassanā do not appear to that monk.} are not
clear to me; sloth and torpor compass my heart about and stay;
joyless, I live the holy life; and doubt about things are ever with
me.''

@end quotation

Such complaints may sound familiar to us, we may feel at times as
though ``drugged''. Doubts about realities cannot be solved unless
right understanding is being developed. There are nāma and rūpa all
the time, there is seeing, visible object, hearing, sound, anger or
attachment; the objects of which right understanding is to be
developed are right at hand but often there is no awareness of them.
We read that the preceptor went with this monk to the Buddha who
exhorted him thus:

@quotation

``Monk, it is ever thus! When one dwells with doors of the senses
unguarded, with no moderation in eating, not bent on vigilance, not
looking for righteous things, nor day in day out practise the practice
of making become things that are wings to enlightenment; then is the
body as though drugged, the quarters are not seen, things are not
clear, sloth and torpor compass the heart and stay; joyless, one lives
the godly life; and doubts about things are ever with one''. 

@end quotation

We then read that the Buddha told that monk to guard the doors of the
senses, to be moderate in eating, to be vigilant and to cultivate the
factors leading to enlightenment. The monk followed the Buddha's
advice. The Buddha's words were the right condition for him to develop
insight, even to the degree that he could attain arahatship. Thus he
was no longer subject to sloth and torpor.

Sloth and torpor destruct energy for kusala. When there is right
effort there are no sloth and torpor. However, there is no self who
can put forth energy for kusala, for the study of the Dhamma or for
the development of right understanding. We can prove this when there
is listlessness and no energy for kusala. At such a moment we cannot
force ourselves to take an interest in kusala. Right effort is only a
conditioned dhamma, not self. There can be a long period of indolence,
but at times there can be conditions for remembering words of the
teachings which can encourage us to develop right understanding. Also
sad events which happen in life can serve as a reminder of the
impermanence of conditioned realities and then we may be urged to be
vigilant, to ``guard the sense-doors'', that is, to be mindful of the
realities appearing through the different doorways. In this life we
are in the human plane where there is opportunity for all kinds of
kusala, for the study of the Dhamma and the development of right
understanding. The goal has been reached only when all defilements
have been eradicated, when arahatship has been attained. When we
realize the task which lies ahead of us we are reminded not to waste
time with akusala. When there is a true sense of urgency to develop
right understanding there will be less opportunity for sloth and
torpor. In the following sutta we are reminded of what we fail to win
when there is indolence and what can be won when there is right
energy. We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (II, Nidāna-vagga,
Kindred Sayings on Cause, 3, par22) that the Buddha encouraged the
monks to apply energy in order to attain the goal. He said:

@quotation

Sadly, monks, lives the man of sloth, involved in bad, wicked things.
Great is the salvation which he fails to win. But he of stirred up
energy lives happily, aloof from bad, wicked things. Great is the
salvation that he makes perfect.

@end quotation

@section Vicikicchā
Vicikicchā or doubt is another akusala
cetasika and this can accompany only one type of citta, namely the
type of moha-mūla-citta which is called: moha-mūla-citta vicikicchā
sampayutta (rooted in ignorance, accompanied by doubt). 

The reality of vicikicchā is not the same as what we mean by doubt in
conventional language. Vicikicchā is not doubt about someone's name or
about the weather. Vicikicchā is doubt about @emph{realities}, about
nāma and rūpa, about cause and result, about the four noble Truths,
about the ``Dependant Origination''.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part IX, Chapter III, 259) defines
vicikicchā as follows: 

@quotation
@dots{}It has shifting about as characteristic, mental wavering as
function, indecision or uncertainty in grasp as manifestation,
unsystematic thought (unwise attention) as proximate cause, and it
should be regarded as a danger to attainment.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 177) gives a similar definition. 

When there is doubt one ``wavers'', one is not sure about realities.
The @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par425) describes doubt in different ways
and states among others that it is ``uncertainty of grasp'',
``stiffness of mind''. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, 259, 260) in its
explanation of this paragraph of the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} states:

@quotation
@dots{}``Fluctuation'' is the inability to establish anything in one mode,
thus, ``Is this state permanent, or is it impermanent?'' Because of
the inability to ``comprehend'' there is ``uncertainty of grasp''@dots{}.

@end quotation

As to ``stiffness'', the @emph{Atthasālinī} remarks that ``mental
rigidity'' is the inability to come to a decision as to the object. We
read: ``Stiffness is the meaning. For perplexity having arisen makes
the mind stiff@dots{}.''

When there is doubt one wonders about realities: ``Is it such or is it
such?'' One wonders, for example, whether a reality is permanent or
impermanent, or whether the reality which appears now is nāma or rūpa.
When there is doubt there is mental rigidity, there is not the
wieldiness of mind which is necessary for the understanding of
realities. Doubt is to be considered as a ``danger for attainment'';
when there is doubt it is impossible to apply oneself to mental
development.

Doubt is different from ignorance, moha, which does not know
realities. But when there is doubt there is also moha which
accompanies all akusala dhammas. When doubt accompanies the akusala
citta, there cannot be determination (adhimokkha) which is ``sure
about the object'', neither can there be ``wish-to-do'' (chanda) which
``searches for the object'' and wants it @footnote{See Chapter 9 and
Chapter 12.}. 

The proximate cause of doubt is ``unwise attention'' to the object
which is experienced at that moment. We read in the @emph{Gradual
Sayings} (Book of the Ones, Chapter II, par5) that the Buddha said to
the monks: 

@quotation

Monks, I know not of any other single thing of such power to cause the
arising of doubt and wavering, if not already arisen; or, if arisen,
to cause its more-becoming and increase, as unsystematic attention.

In him who gives not systematic attention arises doubt and wavering,
if not already arisen; or, if arisen, it is liable to more-becoming
and increase.

@end quotation

When one performs dāna, observes sīla, studies Dhamma or is mindful of
nāma and rūpa, there is no opportunity for doubt, because during such
moments there is ``wise attention''. 

We read in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (I, no. 2, All the
cankers) that the Buddha, when he was near Sāvatthī, in the Jeta
Grove, spoke to the monks on the means of controlling all the cankers.
He spoke about unwise attention and about various kinds of doubt,
pertaining to the past, the future or the present, which may arise
when there is no wise attention. We read about doubt:

@quotation

In these ways he is not wisely attending: if he thinks, ``Now, was I
in a past period? Now, was I not in a past period? Now, what was I in
a past period? Now, how was I in a past period? Now, having been what,
what did I become in a past period?@dots{}.

@end quotation

We read the same about doubt pertaining to the future and doubt
pertaining to the present. 

When doubt is accumulated there can be doubt about many different
subjects. We read in the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1004) that there can
be doubt about the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, the Discipline,
the past or the future or both, the ``Dependant Origination''
@footnote{Book of Analysis, Chapter 17, par915.}. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book II, Part II, Chapter I, 354, 355)
explains as to doubts about the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha,
that one may doubt about the qualities of the Buddha or about the
characteristic marks of his body @footnote{A Buddha has 32 bodily
marks. See Dialogues of the Buddha III, no. 30.}, that one may doubt
whether there is attainment of enlightenment, whether there is
nibbāna, or whether there are people who can attain enlightenment. As
to doubt about the past and the future, this doubt can concern the
``khandhas'', the ``dhātus'' (elements) and ``āyatanas'' (twelve
bases) in the past and in the future. 

Do we have doubt about rebirth? One may not be sure whether it is
true that the last citta in this life will be succeeded by the first
citta of the next life. One may have theoretical understanding of the
fact that each citta which falls away is succeeded by a next one, but
there may still be moments of doubt. We may at times also doubt
whether it is possible to develop right understanding and whether this
is the way leading to enlightenment. Doubt can never be eradicated by
thinking. When we begin to develop understanding of nāma and rūpa
there may be doubt whether the reality appearing at the present moment
is nāma or rūpa. Their characteristics are quite different but we are
confused about them. There can only be less doubt if we continue to be
mindful of them when they appear one at a time. Only in this way can
we learn that, for example, hardness is different from the experience
of hardness and that visible object is different from the experience
of visible object. It is useful to know that doubt is akusala, that it
is a hindrance to the performing of dāna, the observance of sīla and
to mental development. However, doubt can be object of mindfulness;
when there is mindfulness of its characteristic right understanding
can know it as it is. 

Those who are not ariyans have not realized the four noble Truths and
they may still have doubt about realities. The sotāpanna sees
realities as they are, he has eradicated doubt completely. We read in
the suttas that the sotāpanna has ``crossed over doubt''. We read, for
example, in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (II, no. 91,
Brahmāyusutta) about Brahmāyu:

@quotation
@dots{}Having seen dhamma, attained dhamma, known dhamma, plunged into
dhamma, having crossed over doubt, put away uncertainty and attained
without another's help to full confidence in the Teacher's
instruction@dots{}

@end quotation

The sotāpanna still has to continue to develop satipaṭṭhāna, but he is
sure to be eventually liberated from the cycle of birth and death. He
is full of confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. His
confidence is unshakable and thus he has no more doubts about the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. Those who have not attained
enlightenment need to listen often to the Dhamma and to be reminded to
be aware of realities in order to eradicate doubt. 

It is useful to study the different types of akusala citta and their
accompanying cetasikas @footnote{For a summary of them see Appendix 7.
}. The study will help us to see that akusala dhammas arise because of
their appropriate conditions, that citta and cetasikas which arise
together condition one another. We are reminded by the study of
realities that akusala dhamma is not a person, that it does not belong
to a self. However, we should not be contented with merely theoretical
knowledge of the truth. We should continue to develop right
understanding of realities which appear through the six doors. Akusala
dhammas cannot be eradicated immediately. We should first learn to see
them as they are: as conditioned nāmas, not self. Through right
understanding of realities doubt, wrong view and all the other akusala
dhammas can be eradicated. 

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
Why are sloth and torpor mental sickness?

@item
Why is it said that sloth is opposition to energy? 

@item
Can
there be sloth and torpor when there is conceit? 

@item
Can they arise
when there is wrong view? 

@item
What is the meaning of ``prompted'',
sasaṅkhārika? 

@item
Why did the Buddha warn the monks not to be
attached to the ease of bed or to food? 

@item
The anāgāmī is not
attached to the ease of bed or to food. Can he still have sloth and
torpor? 

@item
What is the best cure for sloth and torpor? 

@item
Which kinds of feeling can accompany sloth and torpor? 

@item
Vicikicchā is doubt about realities. Which are the realities one may
have doubts about? 

@item
Who has eradicated doubt? 
@end enumerate

@node Different Groups of Defilements Part I
@chapter Different Groups of Defilements Part I


We are inclined to think that our suffering in life are due to causes
outside ourselves, to unpleasant events or to other people's
behaviour. However, the real cause of sorrow is within ourselves. Our
defilements lead to sorrow. The goal of the Buddha's teachings is the
eradication of defilements and this cannot be achieved unless right
understanding of realities has been developed. All three parts of the
Tipiṭaka, the Vinaya, the Suttanta and the Abhidhamma, have been
taught in order to encourage people to develop the way which leads to
the end of defilements. If we do not forget this goal, no matter which
part of the scriptures we are reading, we can profit to the full from
our study.

In the Abhidhamma realities are classified in numerous ways. In the
Third Book of the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} akusala dhammas have been
classified in different groups. The study of these different
classifications can help us to see the danger of akusala. However, in
order to really know our defilements we should be aware of them when
they appear. For example, we know in theory that there is clinging to
visible object, sound, odour, flavour, tangible object and to mental
objects, but when there is mindfulness we learn that even now, after a
moment of seeing or a moment of hearing, attachment can arise and that
it is bound to arise again and again. Defilements are not merely
abstract categories, they are realities which can appear at any time
and there are many more moments of them than we ever thought.

The fourteen akusala cetasikas which arise with the akusala cittas in
various combinations can be classified in different groups. Each of
these classifications shows a particular aspect and function of the
akusala cetasikas. Some cetasikas occur in several of these groups,
and each time a different aspect is shown. Attachment occurs in all of
these groups and this reminds us of the many ways of clinging to
different kinds of objects. 

One of the groups of defilements is the @emph{āsavas}. Āsava can be
translated as canker, poison or intoxicant. There are four āsavas
(@emph{Dhammasangaṇi} par1096-1100):

@enumerate

@item 
the canker of sensuous desire, kāmāsava

@item 
the canker of becoming, bhavāsava

@item 
the canker of wrong view, diṭṭhāsava

@item 
the canker of ignorance, avijjāsava

@end enumerate

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part I, Chapter II, 48) explains that
āsavas flow from the senses and the mind. In all planes where there is
nāma arising āsavas occur, even in the highest plane of existence
which is the fourth arūpa-brahma plane. The āsavas are like liquor
which has fermented for a long time, the @emph{Atthasālinī} explains.
The āsavas are like poisonous drugs or intoxicants. The
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (XXII, 56) states that the āsavas are exuding
``from unguarded sense-doors like water from cracks in a pot, in the
sense of constant trickling''. The āsavas keep on flowing from birth
to death, they are also flowing at this moment. Are we not attached to
what we see? Then there is the canker of sensuous desire, kāmāvara.
Seeing experiences visible object, and shortly after seeing has fallen
away there are most of the time akusala cittas rooted in attachment,
aversion or ignorance. When the object is pleasant there is likely to
be attachment to the object because we have accumulated such a great
deal of attachment. We are attached to visible object, sound, odour,
flavour and tangible object. We are infatuated with the objects we
experience through the senses and we want to go on experiencing them.
Because of our foolish attachment to what is actually impermanent we
have to continue to be in the cycle of birth and death. We have to be
reborn again and again until the cankers have been extinguished. The
arahat has eradicated the cankers, he does not have to be reborn
again.

We may not understand that birth is sorrowful, but when right
understanding has been developed we will see that all that is
impermanent is sorrowful. We cling to all we experience through the
senses, we cling to life. Clinging is deeply accumulated; even the
first javana-cittas of our life were lobha-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted
in attachment, and this is the case for every living being. 

The canker of desire for rebirth, bhavāsava, is another one of the
āsavas. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Book II, Chapter II, 370) explains
that this ``arises by way of aspiring to rebirth in Rūpa and Arūpa
forms of life''. Even the anāgāmī who has eradicated all clinging to
sensuous objects, can still have clinging to rebirth which is the
result of jhāna. So long as there is attachment to any kind of rebirth
one has to continue to be in the cycle of birth and death.

The canker of wrong view, diṭṭhāsava, comprises, according to the
@emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1099) the conceiving of all speculative
theories such as eternalism, annihilationism, theories about the
world, the soul and the body. So long as one has not attained
enlightenment one tends to cling to the concept of self and this is so
deeply rooted that it is extremely hard to eradicate it. 

The canker of ignorance, avijjāsava, is moha cetasika. It is ignorance
of the four noble Truths, of the past, the future or both, and of the
``Dependant Origination'' (@emph{Dhammasangaṇi}, par1100). We have
innumerable moments of ignorance. Ignorance is dangerous, at the
moment it arises we do not realize that there is ignorance.

We are time and again overcome by the āsavas. It is hard for us to see
their danger. We cannot help being attached to the objects we
experience through the senses. How could we prevent ourselves from
liking pleasant objects? The Buddha warned people of the danger of
sense-pleasures. We read in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (I, no.
22, The Parable of the Water-snake) that the Buddha explained about
the things which are ``stumbling blocks'' to the monk Ariṭṭha who had
wrong understanding of the Dhamma. The Buddha stated about
sense-pleasures:

@quotation
@dots{}Sense-pleasures are said by me to be of little satisfaction, of
much pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril. Sense-pleasures
are likened by me to a skeleton@dots{}to a lump of meat@dots{}to a torch of
dry grass@dots{}to a pit of glowing embers@dots{}to a dream@dots{}to something
borrowed@dots{}to the fruits of a tree@dots{}to a slaughter-house@dots{}to an
impaling stake@dots{}sense-pleasures are likened by me to a snake's head,
of much pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril@dots{}.

@end quotation

When one is still infatuated with sense-pleasures such words are hard
to grasp. We may not like to hear that sense-pleasures are as
sorrowful and dangerous as the things the Buddha compares them to. At
the moment of attachment the object which is experienced seems to be
so pleasant and we fail to see that we are lured by attachment. It is
wisdom, paññā, which sees the danger of sense-pleasures.

The anāgāmī and the arahat fully understand the danger of
sense-pleasures; they have no conditions for the arising of the canker
of sensuous desire, kāmāsava, because it has been eradicated. When
understanding of realities begins to develop it cannot yet achieve
detachment from sense-pleasures. Some people are inclined to think
that they must first of all become detached, before they can begin to
develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa. However, this is not the
right way of practice. Right understanding of whatever reality
appears, even if it is attachment, should be developed. Only paññā
which knows nāma and rūpa as they are can eventually bring about
detachment. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} states about the āsavas that they ``exude
from unguarded sense-doors''. The sense-doors are ``guarded'' through
the development of satipaṭṭhāna. We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings}
(Book of the Threes, Chapter II, par16, The Sure Course) that a monk
who possesses three qualities is ``proficient in the practice leading
to the Sure Course'' and ``has strong grounds for the destruction of
the āsavas''. These three qualities are moderation in eating, the
guarding of the six doors and vigilance. We read concerning the
guarding of the six doors:

@quotation

And how does he keep watch over the door of his sense faculties?

Herein, a monk, seeing an object with the eye, does not grasp at the
general features or at the details thereof. Since coveting and
dejection, evil, unprofitable states might overwhelm one who dwells
with the faculty of the eye uncontrolled, he applies himself to such
control, sets a guard over the faculty of the eye, attains control
thereof@dots{}.

@end quotation

The same is said about the other doorways. The six doorways should be
guarded. How does one, when seeing an object with the eye, not ``grasp
at the general features or at the details thereof''? In being mindful
of the reality which appears. This is the way to see realities as they
are, to see them as impermanent, dukkha and non-self. However, even
the sotāpanna who has eradicated the ``canker of wrong view'',
diṭṭhāsava, still clings to sensuous objects. Even someone who has
realized the arising and falling away of visible object which appears,
of sound which appears, may still cling to them. Clinging has been
accumulated from life to life, how then could one become detached at
once?

There are four stages of enlightenment, and at each stage defilements
are progressively eradicated. Paññā has to grow keener and keener in
order to be able to eradicate them. The lokuttara magga-citta
(supramundane path-consciousness) which, at the first stage of
enlightenment (the stage of the sotāpanna), experiences nibbāna for
the first time, eradicates only the canker of wrong view. The
sotāpanna still has the canker of sensuous desire, the canker of
desire for rebirth and the canker of ignorance. He still has desire,
but it has become less gross than the desire of the non-ariyan, the
``worldling'' (puthujjana). The magga-citta of the sakadāgāmī (who has
attained the second stage of enlightenment) does not eradicate desire,
but desire has become attenuated more. The magga-citta of the anāgāmī
(who has attained the third stage of enlightenment) eradicates the
canker of sensuous desire, but he still has the canker of desire for
rebirth and the canker of ignorance. The magga-citta of the arahat
eradicates the canker of desire for rebirth and the canker of
ignorance. The arahat is ``canker-freed''. 

Another group of defilements is the group of the @emph{Floods} or
@emph{Oghas} (@emph{Dhammasangaṇi} par1151). There are four floods
which are the same defilements as the cankers, but the classification
as floods shows a different aspect. The floods are:

@itemize

@item
the flood of sensuous desire (kāmogha)

@item
the flood of desire for rebirth (bhavogha)

@item
the flood of wrong view (diṭṭhogha)

@item
the flood of ignorance (avijjogha)

@end itemize
We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part I, Chapter II, 49) that the
``floods'' submerge a person again and again in the cycle of birth and
death.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XXII, 56) states:

@quotation
@dots{}The Floods are so called in the sense of sweeping away into the
ocean of becoming, and in the sense of being hard to cross@dots{}.

@end quotation

The classification of defilements under the aspect of floods reminds
us of their danger. A flood is dangerous, it can drown us. 

In the suttas the cycle of birth and death has been compared to a
dangerous ocean, which has to be crossed. We read in the @emph{Kindred
Sayings} (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Fourth Fifty, Chapter 3, par187,
Ocean):

@quotation

``The ocean! The ocean!'' monks, says the ignorant worldling. But
that, monks, is not the ocean in the discipline of the ariyan. That
ocean (of the worldling), monks, is a heap of water, a great flood of
water.

The eye of a man, monks, is the ocean. Its impulse is made of objects.
Who so endures that object-made impulse,- of him, monks, it is said,
``he has crossed over. That ocean of the eye, with its waves and
whirlpools, its sharks and demons, the brahmin has crossed and gone
beyond. He stands on dry ground''@dots{}.

@end quotation

When there is no more clinging to the eye and objects, or to all the
other realities, one has ``crossed over''. Further on we read that the
Buddha spoke the verse:

@example

Who so has crossed this monster-teeming sea,
With its devils and fearsome waves impassable,
``Versed in the lore'', ``living the holy life'',
``Gone to world's end'', and ``gone beyond'' he is called.

@end example

The arahat has crossed the sea of the cycle of birth and death
(saṁsāra), he has gone to the world's end, he has ``gone beyond''.

The danger of being drowned is real. We are infatuated with visible
object, sound, smell, and all the other objects which can be
experienced through the six doors. Every time we like one of the
sensuous objects we are in the flood of sensuous desire, we fail to
see the danger of this flood, we are forgetful. Many times we are
forgetful and we do not even want to be mindful. The Buddha reminded
people that pleasant objects do not last and that we all have to
suffer old age, sickness and death. If we listen to the Buddha's words
without developing understanding we cannot grasp their real meaning.
If we develop right understanding of all realities which appear we
will know more clearly when there is clinging to the objects we
experience and we will come to see the danger of clinging. The floods
are eradicated at the different stages of enlightenment, at the same
stages as the corresponding cankers. 

The @emph{Yokes} or @emph{Yogas} are another group of defilements.
This group consists again of the same defilements as the cankers and
the floods. We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part I, Chapter II,
49) that the ``yokes'' tie a person to the cycle of birth and death.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XXII, 56) states about the yoghas (here
translated as bonds):

@quotation

The Bonds are so called because they do not allow disengagement from
an object and disengagement from suffering (dukkha).

@end quotation

The four yoghas are:
@enumerate

@item
the yoke of sensuous desire, kāmayogha

@item
the yoke of desire for rebirth, bhavayogha

@item
the yoke of wrong view, diṭṭhiyogha

@item
the yoke of ignorance, avijjāyogha

@end enumerate

Thus, the yokes are the same defilements as the cankers and the
floods, but the classification by way of yokes reminds us that we are
tied to the round of rebirths. The different yokes are eradicated at
the same stages of enlightenment as the corresponding cankers and
floods

@subsection Questions

@enumerate 

@item
What is the use of classifying the same
cetasikas as cankers, floods and yokes? 

@item
Do we have to be
detached first before we develop wisdom? 

@item
We may agree that
sense-pleasures are dangerous, but attachment to them still arises.
How can one really see their danger? 
@end enumerate

@node Different Groups of Defilements Part II
@chapter Different Groups of Defilements Part II

The akusala cetasikas which are attachment, wrong view and ignorance
are classified in different groups: as four cankers, four floods and
four yokes. Each of these groups consists of the same defilements, but
different aspects are shown by these classifications. The cankers flow
or ``exude'', or they are like intoxicants. The floods are dangerous,
they can drown us, they sweep us away into the ocean of rebirths. The
yokes tie us to the cycle of birth and death. 

There are still other groups of defilements and by their
classifications again different aspects are shown. One of these groups
is the @emph{ties} or @emph{knots}, @emph{ganthas}. Instead of gantha
the term @emph{kāyagantha}, @emph{bodily tie,} is used as well. Kāya
which means body refers to the physical body as well as to the
``mental body'' (Vis. XXII, 54). The ganthas tie us to the round of
rebirths. We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part I, Chapter II,
49):

In the knot-group, states which knot or tie in repeated rounds of
birth by way of birth and decease the person in whom they exist are
termed ``knots''.

There are four kāyaganthas, ``bodily ties'' (@emph{Dhammasangaṇi},
par1135-1140):

@enumerate

@item
the bodily tie of covetousness (abhijjhā kāyagantha)

@item
the bodily tie of ill-will (vyāpāda kāyagantha)

@item
the bodily tie of clinging to rules and rituals or wrong practice
(sīlabbata parāmāsa kāyagantha)

@item
the bodily tie of dogmatism (idaṃ-saccābhinivesa kāyagantha)
@end enumerate

The first tie comprises all kinds of covetousness, all degrees of
lobha, be they gross or subtle. We should know that there can also be
lobha in the form of hopes and expectations: we hope for good health,
we hope that other people will like us, we hope for honour and praise,
for success in our undertakings. All degrees and shades of lobha are a
tie which binds us to the cycle of birth and death. 

The tie of ill-will is dosa. All degrees of dosa such as irritation,
ill-temper, ill-will or hostility are a tie which binds us to the
round of rebirths.

The tie of clinging to rules and rituals is wrong practice and this is
a form of wrong view. People are entangled by this tie when they
erroneously believe that, in order to develop the way leading to
enlightenment, they have to follow certain rules such as abstaining
from particular kinds of food or refraining from reading or talking.
So long as wrong view has not been eradicated one may have many
moments of wrong practice, and one may mistake the wrong practice for
the right practice. People may cling to particular places or
situations as being favourable for the development of satipaṭṭhāna.
They believe that mindfulness can only arise in such places or
situations. Then there is bound to be wrong practice. If we know when
there is wrong practice we can be cured of it.

The tie of dogmatism (idaṃ-saccābhinivesa, the belief: this alone is
truth) comprises all forms of wrong view, except wrong practice which
is the third tie, as we have seen. People are entangled by the fourth
tie when they have a wrong interpretation of reality and when they
believe that only their interpretation is the truth. When someone, for
example, believes that there is no kamma and no result of kamma, he is
entangled by the fourth tie. The view that there is no kamma and no
result of kamma is very dangerous, it can condition unwholesome deeds.
One may believe that, after death, one will be annihilated, that there
is no rebirth. Then one is entangled by the fourth tie. 

As we have seen, wrong view, diṭṭhi, has been classified as canker, as
flood, as yoke and as (bodily) tie. Under the aspect of tie diṭṭhi has
been classified as twofold: as wrong practice and as false view. 

The magga-citta of the sotāpanna eradicates the third and the fourth
ties. The sotāpanna knows the right Path and he cannot deviate from it
anymore, he has no conditions for wrong practice. He has no wrong view
of realities. He still has the first tie, covetousness, and the second
tie, ill-will, but they are not of the degree that they lead to an
unhappy rebirth.

The magga-citta of the anāgāmī eradicates the second tie, ill-will. As
regards the first tie, the anāgāmī does not cling to sensuous objects,
but he has not eradicated the more subtle forms of clinging, which is
clinging to rebirth in rūpa-brahma planes and arūpa-brahma planes.
Thus, he still clings to rebirth. He has not eradicated the first tie. 

The magga-citta of the arahat eradicates the first tie. He has no more
clinging, no clinging to rebirth; he is no longer entangled by any of
the four ties. 

Another group of defilements is the @emph{ways of clinging} or
@emph{upādāna}. There are four ways of clinging (@emph{Dhammasangaṇi},
par1213-1217): 

@enumerate

@item
sensuous clinging (kāmupādāna)

@item
clinging to wrong view (diṭṭhupādāna)

@item
clinging to ``rules and rituals'' (sīlabbatupādāna)

@item
clinging to personality belief (attavādupādāna)

@end enumerate

The first way of clinging, sensuous clinging, comprises clinging to
all the objects which can be experienced through the senses
(@emph{Visuddhimagga}, XVII, 243). We should scrutinize ourselves
whether there is clinging at this moment. We may not notice that there
is clinging very often, after seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
touching or on account of the experience of an object through the
mind-door. When we sit on a soft chair there is likely to be clinging
already to softness, but we do not notice it. We look at birds, dogs
and cats and we do not notice that we tend to cling already before we
define what it is that is seen. At the moment of clinging we create a
new condition for life to go on in the cycle of birth and death.
Clinging is one of the links in the ``Dependant Origination''
(Paṭiccasamuppāda), the conditional arising of phenomena in the round
of rebirths. Because of craving (taṇhā) there is clinging or firm
grasping (upādāna). So long as there is any form of clinging we have
to continue to be in the cycle of birth and death. 

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (II, Kindred Sayings on Cause,
Chapter 5, par52, Grasping, Upādāna):

@quotation

While staying at Sāvatthī the Exalted One said:--

In him, monks, who contemplates the enjoyment that there is in all
that makes for grasping, craving grows. Grasping is conditioned by
craving. Becoming is conditioned by grasping. Birth is conditioned by
becoming. Decay-and-death is conditioned by birth. Grief,
lamentation, suffering, sorrow, despair come to pass. Such is the
uprising of this entire mass of ill.

@end quotation

The Buddha then uses a simile of a bonfire which keeps on burning so
long as it is supplied with fuel. If there is no fuel the fire will
become extinct. We read further on:

@quotation

Even so in him who contemplates the misery that there is in all that
makes for grasping, craving ceases, and hence grasping ceases,
becoming, birth, decay-and-death, and sorrow cease. Such is the
ceasing of this entire mass of ill. 

@end quotation

We want to go on living and experiencing objects through the senses,
this is beyond control. However, the Buddha's words about the
impermanence of all conditioned things, about decay and death, can
remind us of what life really is: only fleeting phenomena.

The other three ways of clinging are forms of wrong view. As regards
clinging to wrong view (diṭṭhupādāna), this comprises clinging to
false views about kamma and the result of kamma, and to other
speculative theories. As regards clinging to wrong practice, when
someone takes the wrong practice for the right practice there are no
conditions for the development of right understanding of realities and
thus wrong view cannot be eradicated. Wrong practice is also one of
the ``ties'', as we have seen. 

Clinging to personality belief is a form of wrong view which arises
when one firmly believes that the five khandhas are ``self''. We can
think of concepts such as ``body'' or ``mind'' but there may not
necessarily be wrong view. However, the latent tendency of wrong view
has not been eradicated so long as one has not become a sotāpanna. We
all have accumulated personality belief and when there are conditions
it can arise. Someone may cling with wrong view to the rūpa-kkhandha,
he may take the body for self. When one becomes older and suffers from
sickness, it is obvious that the body changes, but there may still be
clinging to an idea of the body which belongs to a ``self''. What is
taken for ``my body'' consists of different rūpas which arise and fall
away. When we are walking, standing, sitting or lying down, it is not
``my body'' which can be directly experienced, there are only
different elements, rūpas, such as hardness, softness, heat or cold,
and these can be experienced one at a time. When mindfulness arises it
can be aware of one reality at a time and in this way right
understanding can develop and the wrong view of self can eventually be
eradicated.

Someone may take the khandha of feeling for self, but feeling changes
all the time. Feeling which arises now is not the same as feeling a
moment ago. The khandha of perception or remembrance (saññā) is
different each moment, but one may be inclined to take it for self.
When we recognize or remember something, it is not self who does so,
but saññā. Saṅkhārakkhandha, the khandha of ``formations'' or
``activities'' (all cetasikas other than feeling and saññā), changes
all the time; sometimes akusala cetasikas arise, sometimes kusala
cetasikas, but one may still be inclined to take cetasikas for self.
Viññāṇakkhandha, consciousness, changes all the time; there are
seeing, hearing and thinking of concepts at different moments, but
there can be a deep-rooted belief of ``I see'', ``I hear'', ``I
think''. In reality the seeing sees, the hearing hears, and another
citta again thinks of concepts, they are all different cittas which
are not self. There are different cittas which arise and fall away,
one at a time, and each of them experiences just one object. There may
be theoretical understanding of the truth, but wrong view is deeply
rooted; it cannot be eradicated by thinking. Wrong view can be
eradicated only by developing right understanding of the reality which
appears at the present moment. 

Among the ways of clinging, clinging to wrong view has been classified
as threefold: as clinging to wrong view (speculative theories), as
clinging to wrong practice and as clinging to personality belief. Each
of these three classifications shows a different aspect of wrong view. 

The magga-citta of the sotāpanna eradicates the three ways of clinging
which are clinging to wrong view. He still has the first way of
clinging, sensuous clinging. Even the sakadāgāmī and the anāgāmī have
the first way of clinging. The anāgāmī has no more clinging to
sensuous objects, but he still has clinging to rebirth which is the
result of jhāna, and this form of clinging is in this classification
included in the first way of clinging. The magga-citta of the arahat
eradicates the first way of clinging (Visuddhimagga, XVII, 245). 

The @emph{Hindrances} or @emph{Nīvaraṇas} are another group of
defilements. In the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1152-1163) the hindrances
are classified as sixfold:

@enumerate

@item
sensuous desire (kāmacchanda)

@item
ill-will (vyāpāda)

@item
sloth and torpor (thīna-middha)

@item
restlessness and regret (uddhacca-kukkucca)

@item
doubt (vicikicchā)

@item
ignorance (avijjā)@footnote{For sensuous desire see Chapter, 15, for
ill-will Chapter 18, for sloth and torpor Chapter 20, for restlessness
Chapter 14, for regret Chapter 19, for doubt Chapter 20 and for
ignorance Chapter 14.} 

@end enumerate

In the suttas and in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV, 104, 105) the
hindrances are classified as fivefold; ignorance is not among them.
However, this should not be seen as a discrepancy. Classifications are
not rigid, their aim is to remind us of reality.

The hindrances are obstructions, overwhelming the mind, weakening
insight @footnote{Atthasālinī, II, Book II, Part II, Chapter II,
382.}. The hindrances obstruct the development of what is wholesome.
When we are attached to pleasant sights and sounds, to people or
to particular places, there is the hindrance of @emph{sensuous
desire}. At the moment of attachment we do not realize that it
obstructs the arising of kusala citta, but we should know that at such
a moment there cannot be generosity or loving kindness. 

@emph{Ill-will} is another akusala dhamma which is one of the
hindrances. The hindrance of ill-will is dosa cetasika and it
comprises all shades and degrees of aversion. Even a moment of slight
annoyance is a hindrance, it obstructs kusala. When there is ill-will
there is no loving-kindness, no compassion, no understanding of nāma
and rūpa. However, some moments later mindfulness can arise and be
aware of any reality which appears, even of annoyance.

@emph{Sloth} and @emph{torpor} are two akusala cetasikas which are
classified as a pair among the hindrances. When they arise there is
mental indisposition and unwieldiness. They have the same proximate
cause, namely, unwise attention. When there are sloth and torpor there
is no energy, no vigour for kusala, and thus they obstruct kusala.
When there are sloth and torpor one has no confidence in the
development of right understanding. 

@emph{Restlessness} and @emph{regret} (uddhacca-kukkucca) is another
pair among the hindrances. When there is restlessness and regret the
citta is not peaceful. As we have seen, restlessness accompanies each
akusala citta and regret accompanies only dosa-mūla-citta. The
omission of kusala and the commission of akusala are the objects of
regret. Restlessness and regret obstruct the performing of kusala, and
at such moments there cannot be mindfulness of nāma and rūpa.

@emph{Doubt} (vicikicchā) is another akusala dhamma which is a
hindrance. Doubt about the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, doubt
about realities, all these kinds of doubt are a hindrance to the
development of kusala, a hindrance to the development of right
understanding. We need courage to continue to develop satipaṭṭhāna, so
that doubt can eventually be eradicated. Doubt is a reality and thus
it can be the object of sati. The citta which is accompanied by
mindfulness is kusala citta, but mindfulness can have as its object
any reality which appears, even akusala dhamma. 

@emph{Ignorance} (avijjā) can, as we have seen, also be classified as
a hindrance. There is ignorance with each akusala citta, ignorance is
the root of all evil. Ignorance blinds us, it is a hindrance to kusala
and to right understanding. We may see the danger of lobha and of
dosa, but we may not see the danger of ignorance. If we see its danger
we will develop right understanding so that ignorance can eventually
be eradicated. 

In samatha the hindrances can be temporarily subdued by the
jhāna-factors which accompany the jhāna-cittas of the different stages
of jhāna, but they cannot be eradicated. They can be eradicated only
by the right understanding which is developed in vipassanā.

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (V, Mahā-vagga, Book II, Kindred
Sayings on the Limbs of Wisdom, Chapter IV, par5) about the condition
for the arising of the hindrances:

@quotation

Monks, in him who practises unsystematic attention, sensual desire, if
not already arisen, arises; and, if already arisen, sensual desire
conduces to the more-becoming and growth thereof.

So also malevolence, sloth and torpor, excitement and flurry, doubt
and wavering, if not yet arisen, do arise; and, if arisen, conduce to
the more-becoming and growth thereof.

@end quotation

In the following sutta we read that systematic attention (wise
attention) conditions the arising of the ``limbs of wisdom'' which, if
they have arisen, by cultivation go to fulfilment. The ``limbs of
wisdom'', which are also called the ``factors of enlightenment''
(bojjhangas), are: mindfulness, investigation of Dhamma
(dhamma-vicaya), energy, rapture, tranquillity, concentration and
equanimity. 

Further on, in the same section (par8), we read again about the
hindrances which weaken insight and about the ``limbs of wisdom''
which conduce to realizing the fruits of liberation by knowledge. We
read:

@quotation

Now, monks, at the time when the ariyan disciple makes the Dhamma his
object, gives attention to it, with all his mind considers it, with
ready ear listens to the Dhamma,---at such a time these five
hindrances do not exist in him; at such a time the seven limbs of
wisdom by cultivation go to fulfilment. 

@end quotation

This sutta reminds us of the great value of listening to the Dhamma
and carefully and thoroughly considering it, in order to be able to
apply it. 

The hindrances are eradicated at different stages of enlightenment.
The magga-citta of the sotāpanna eradicates doubt. Since the sotāpanna
has no more wrong view and sees realities as they are, there cannot be
any doubt about them. The magga-citta of the anāgāmī eradicates
sensuous desire, ill-will and regret. The magga-citta of the arahat
eradicates sloth and torpor, restlessness and ignorance. The arahat is
free of all the hindrances. Defilements can only be eradicated stage
by stage because they are so deeply rooted. 

In order to eradicate defilements we should have patience to develop
understanding gradually. It is essential to know the difference
between the moments we are absorbed in thinking of concepts, such as
people and possessions, situations or events of life, and the moments
of mindfulness which is aware of only one reality at a time as it
presents itself through one of the six doors. We should not try to
suppress thinking, it is real; it arises because it is conditioned.
Thinking can be object of mindfulness, it can be known as a type of
nāma, arising because of its own conditions, not self. There is not
only thinking, there are also seeing, visible object, hearing or
sound, but we are mostly forgetful of these realities. We are used to
paying attention only to concepts, but gradually we can learn to be
mindful of realities. We cannot expect to have full understanding of
realities at once. If we are intent only on what appears at the
present moment we do not worry about the fact that understanding will
have to be developed for a long time, even for many lives. There is no
self who has understanding, it is understanding, paññā cetasika, which
can develop and see things as they really are. We tend to forget that
paññā is a conditioned nāma. 

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (II, Niddāna-vagga, Chapter XXI,
Kindred Sayings about Brethren, par6, 11, 12) about different monks
who attained arahatship. They had to develop right understanding life
after life. The Buddha repeatedly said that it was ``no easy matter''
to attain the goal. We read for example about Kappina (par11) that the
Buddha said:

@quotation
@dots{}That monk is highly gifted, of wondrous power. No easy matter is
it to win that which he formerly had not won, even that for the sake
of which clansmen rightly leave the home for the homeless, even that
uttermost goal of the divine living which he has attained, wherein he
abides, having come just here and now to know it thoroughly for
himself and to realize it.

@end quotation

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
When does the ``bodily tie of dogmatism'' arise?

@item
Is it a discrepancy that the hindrances are sometimes classified as
fivefold, ignorance being excluded, and sometimes as sixfold?

@item
Why is even a slight annoyance a hindrance to kusala?

@item
Why can wrong view about seeing, hearing or thinking only be
eliminated by paññā as they appear in daily life?

@end enumerate

@node Different Groups of Defilements Part III
@chapter Different Groups of Defilements Part III

Defilements can be classified in many different ways and each
classification reminds us of the danger of akusala. There is another
group of defilements which is again completely different, namely the
group of the @emph{latent tendencies} or @emph{anusayas}. 

In the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} the latent tendencies have not been
classified as a group. Only lobha as ``latent bias'', anusaya, has
been specifically mentioned among the many aspects of lobha (par1059).
The @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part II, Chapter II, 366) comments: ``As
latent bias greed lies chronically in us as a strong (tendency)''.
There is not only the latent tendency of lobha, there are seven
akusala dhammas which can be classified as latent tendencies and these
lie dormant in us as strong leanings. We read in the @emph{Book of
Analysis} (Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17, par949) that there are seven anusayas
@footnote{See also Visuddhimagga XXII, 60, and Yamaka, the sixth Book
of the Abhidhamma, Part VII (translation: Guide through the Abhidhamma
Piṭaka, Ven. Nyanatiloka, BPS. Kandy, 1971).}:

@enumerate

@item
the latent tendency of lust for sense pleasure (kāmarāgānusaya)

@item
the latent tendency of aversion (paṭighānusaya)

@item
the latent tendency of conceit (mānānusaya)

@item
the latent tendency of wrong view (diṭṭhānusaya)

@item
the latent tendency of doubt (vicikicchānusaya)

@item
the latent tendency of lust for becoming (bhava-rāgānusaya)

@item
the latent tendency of ignorance (avijjānusaya)

@end enumerate

The classification of akusala dhammas by way of latent tendencies
reminds us of their stubbornness, their pertinaciousness. The latent
tendencies are like microbes investing the body. They are latent but
they may become active at any moment, when conditions are favourable
@footnote{Ven. Nyanaponika, Abhidhamma Studies V, The Problem of Time,
3, the Concept of the Present in the Abhidhamma. BPS. Kandy, 1976.}.
Latent tendencies are hard to get rid of.

We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XXII, 60) about the stubbornness
of the latent tendencies:

@quotation
@dots{}For it is owing to their inveteracy that they are called inherent
tendencies (anusaya) since they inhere (anusenti) as cause for the
arising of greed for sense desires, etc. , again and again.

@end quotation

The latent tendencies are ``inveterate'', that is, they are firmly
established, for a long time, obstinate, hard to eradicate. 

One may wonder why not all akusala dhammas have been classified as
latent tendencies. Have we not accumulated all akusala dhammas from
life to life? We should note that the seven akusala dhammas which have
been classified as latent tendencies are particularly obstinate and
condition the arising of the other defilements.

So long as latent tendencies have not been eradicated, defilements
arise again and again. For example, when someone is reborn in one of
the brahma-planes, there are no conditions for aversion in that plane.
However, so long as the latent tendency of aversion has not been
eradicated, aversion is bound to arise again when that person is
reborn in one of the sensuous planes, after his lifespan in the
brahma-plane has been terminated.

Latent tendencies are eradicated at different stages of
enlightenment@footnote{Atthasālinī II, Book I, Part VIII, Chapter I,
235-236.}. The magga-citta of the sotāpanna eradicates the latent
tendency of wrong view and of doubt and thus these akusala dhammas can
never arise again. The magga-citta of the sakadāgāmī does not
completely eradicate any of the other latent tendencies, but, it
``severs the gross latent bias of sense-desires and the gross latent
bias of aversion'', as the @emph{Atthasālinī} @footnote{Ibidem.}
states.

As we have seen, there are many degrees of defilements, they can be
gross or more subtle. The sakadāgāmī still has the latent tendencies
of sensuous desire and aversion, but they have become attenuated.
Therefore, in comparison with the sotāpanna these latent tendencies
are less gross, they are more subtle. The group of latent tendencies
as a whole can be called subtle defilements. They are subtle in so far
as they are latent; they are subtle in comparison with akusala citta
rooted in lobha, dosa or moha, which appears, and which can be called
``medium defilement'' and with akusala citta which has the intensity
to motivate evil deeds through body, speech or mind, which can be
called ``gross defilement''. However, the term subtle should not
mislead us. The latent tendencies are dangerous, pertinacious, they
are hard to eradicate. They condition the arising of akusala dhammas
again and again. 

The magga-citta of the anāgāmī eradicates completely the latent
tendencies of sense-desire and aversion, these can never arise again.
However, he has not eradicated all forms of clinging, he still has the
latent tendency of lust for becoming, rebirth which is the result of
jhāna. The magga-citta of the arahat eradicates the latent tendencies
of lust for becoming, of conceit and of ignorance. When there is no
more ``soil'' for defilements to grow in, the round of becoming comes
to an end.

The @emph{Fetters} or Saṃyojanas are another group of akusala
dhammas. The saṃyojanas ``fetter khandhas (in this life) to khandhas
(of the next), or kamma to its fruit@footnote{So long as there is the
performing of kamma there will be vipāka and thus life goes on.}, or
beings to suffering@dots{}(@emph{Visuddhimagga} XXII, 48). Through the
fetters we are tied to the cycle of birth and death
@footnote{Atthasālinī (I, Book I, Part I, Chapter II, 48).}. In the
@emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par1113) we find the following classification of
ten fetters@footnote{The Book of Analysis, Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17,
par969, has the same classification.}: 

@enumerate

@item
sensuous desire (kāma-rāga)

@item
ill-will (vyāpāda)

@item
conceit (māna)

@item
wrong view (diṭṭhi)

@item
doubt (vicikicchā)

@item
clinging to rules and rituals (sīlabbata-parāmāsa)

@item
clinging to rebirth (bhava-rāga)

@item
envy (issā)

@item
stinginess (macchariya)

@item
ignorance (avijjā)

@end enumerate

In the classifications of the fetters as given above, diṭṭhi has been
classified under two aspects: wrong view and wrong practice (clinging
to rules and rituals). When there is no right practice, the wrong view
of self and other defilements cannot be eradicated and thus we are
fettered to the cycle of birth and death. When there is no mindfulness
of one reality at a time, the nāma or rūpa appearing now, there is no
right practice, one does not develop the eightfold Path. So long as
one has not become a sotāpanna there may be wrong practice. 

Envy and stinginess are akusala dhammas which have only been
classified by way of fetters but not in the other groups of
defilements. We should find out whether there is envy when someone
else receives a token of honour we did not receive. Attachment to self
conditions coarse akusala such as jealousy. The sotāpanna who has
eradicated the wrong view of self has also eradicated jealousy as well
as stinginess. If we develop understanding of nāma and rūpa in daily
life, we may begin to see that life is actually one moment of
experiencing an object. Sometimes the object is pleasant, sometimes it
is unpleasant, this depends entirely on conditions. The experience of
pleasant objects and unpleasant objects is conditioned by kamma, by
deeds which have been done. If we see life as different phenomena
which each arise because of their own conditions, there will be less
opportunity for jealousy. When we see how we at times can be
overpowered by jealousy and other akusala dhammas we can be reminded
to develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa in order to eradicate
akusala. 

There is another way of classifying fetters and this shows us again
that classifications are not rigid. We find for example in the
@emph{Book of Analysis} (Chapter 17, par940)@footnote{See also
Visuddhimagga XXII,
48. The same way of classification also occurs in the suttas, for
example in the Dialogues of the Buddha III, no. 33, 234.} the
following classification of the fetters which makes a distinction
between ``lower fetters'' and ``higher fetters''. There are five lower
fetters (orambhāgiya-saṃyojana) which tie beings to the sensuous
planes and five higher fetters (uddhambhāgiya-saṃyojana) which tie
beings to the higher planes, the rūpa-brahma planes and the
arūpa-brahma planes. 

The lower fetters are:

@itemize

@item
personality belief (sakkāya-diṭṭhi)

@item
doubt (vicikicchā)

@item
clinging to rules and rituals (sīlabbata-parāmāsa)

@item
sensuous desire (kāma-rāga)

@item
ill-will (vyāpāda)
@end itemize

The higher fetters are:

@itemize

@item
lust for rebirth in rūpa-brahma planes (rūpa-rāga)

@item
lust for rebirth in arūpa-brahma planes (arūpa-rāga)

@item
conceit (māna)

@item
restlessness (uddhacca)

@item
ignorance (avijjā)

@end itemize

In this classification wrong view has been classified as twofold:
under the aspect of personality belief and wrong practice. Clinging
has been classified as threefold: as sensuous desire, as clinging to
rebirth which is the result of rūpa-jhāna and as clinging to rebirth
which is the result of arūpa-jhāna. Envy and stinginess do not occur
in this classification. 

The magga-citta of the sotāpanna eradicates the three lower fetters of
personality belief, clinging to rules and rituals (wrong practice) and
doubt. He has not eradicated sensuous desire and ill-will, but for him
these are not as gross as in the case of the non-ariyan; they cannot
lead to an unhappy rebirth. 

The magga-citta of the sakadāgāmī does not eradicate the fetters of
sensuous desire and ill-will, but they have become attenuated. Paññā
has to be developed to a high degree in order that desire and ill-will
can be eradicated. The anāgāmī eradicates both these fetters. He is no
longer tied by the lower fetters, but he is still tied by the higher
fetters. This shows how hard it is to eradicate these fetters. Only
the magga-citta of the arahat can eradicate them. The arahat does not
cling at all, he does not cling to the result of jhāna, he does not
cling to rebirth in any plane of existence. He has no more conceit,
restlessness and ignorance, he has eradicated all akusala dhammas. He
has no akusala citta nor kusala citta, instead he has kiriyacitta
which does not produce any result. The arahat is truly a perfected
one, his task has been fulfilled. He is no longer fettered to the
cycle of birth and death.

Another group of akusala dhammas are the @emph{defilements},
@emph{kilesas}. They are dirty, unclean, impure; they defile or
torment the mind. The following ten akusala dhammas have been
classified as defilements (@emph{Dhammasangaṇi}, par1229)
@footnote{See also the Book of Analysis, Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17, par966.
} :
@enumerate

@item
greed (lobha)

@item
hate (dosa)

@item
ignorance (moha)

@item
conceit (māna)

@item
wrong view (diṭṭhi)

@item
doubt (vicikicchā)

@item
sloth (thīna)

@item
restlessness (uddhacca)

@item
shamelessness (ahirika)

@item
recklessness (anottappa)

@end enumerate

We can use the word defilement or kilesa in a wider sense and then we
mean all akusala dhammas. But when defilements are classified as a
particular group only the above mentioned akusala dhammas are meant.
Torpor (middha), stinginess (macchariya), regret (kukkucca) and envy
(issā) have not been classified in this group. The
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (XXII, 49) states about defilements: ``They are
so called because they are themselves defiled and they defile the
states associated with them.''

Shamelessness and recklessness which have not been classified in one
of the other groups are classified among the defilements.
Shamelessness has no shame of akusala and recklessness does not fear
its consequences. They arise with each akusala citta, they defile
citta and the accompanying cetasikas. There are many degrees of
shamelessness and recklessness. Some people are ashamed of gross
defilements and they fear their consequences, but they are not ashamed
of akusala citta which is not of the intensity to motivate unwholesome
deeds. For example, when we are at this moment forgetful of realities
such as seeing or hearing it is evident that we have no shame of
neglectfulness with regard to the development of right understanding. 

Defilements are eradicated at the different stages of enlightenment.
The magga-citta of the sotāpanna eradicates wrong view and doubt. The
magga-citta of the anāgāmī eradicates hate. The anāgāmī does not cling
to sensuous objects but he may still cling to rebirth which is the
result of jhāna. Since this kind of clinging is, in this group of
akusala dhammas, included in the defilement of greed, lobha, he has
not eradicated this defilement. The magga-citta of the arahat
eradicates the defilements of greed, ignorance, conceit, sloth,
restlessness, shamelessness and recklessness. The arahat is free from
all defilements.

Summarizing the different groups of akusala dhammas, they are:
@enumerate

@item
cankers, āsavas

@item
floods, oghas

@item
yokes, yoghas

@item
ties, ganthas

@item
ways of clinging, upādānas

@item
hindrances, nīvaraṇas
 
@item
latent tendencies, anusayas

@item
fetters, saṃyojanas
 
@item
defilements, kilesas

@end enumerate

Attachment, lobha, occurs in all of these groups and wrong view,
diṭṭhi, in all groups except the group of the hindrances. This reminds
us of our entanglement by lobha and diṭṭhi. Lobha and diṭṭhi occur
sometimes within one group more than once, under different aspects. We
should know what the object of lobha is in each classification,
because sometimes lobha stands for sensuous clinging and sometimes
clinging to the result of jhāna has been included as well.

Each of these groups can remind us of the dangers of akusala dhamma.
For example, the classification by way of knots (ganthas) or of
fetters (saṃyojanas) can remind us of the danger of being tied or
chained to the cycle of birth and death. We are overcome by the
cankers and by the floods, we are chained and fettered, but we may not
realize it. The classification by ways of clinging (upādānas) shows us
how we are in the grip of clinging to objects which are experienced
through the senses and of clinging to the self. We forget that
attachment cannot lead to happiness, that it leads to sorrow. 

In the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (II, Niddāna-vagga, Chapter XVII,
Kindred Sayings on Gain and Favours) we read in forty three suttas
that the Buddha reminded the monks of the danger of attachment to
gains, favours and flattery. We read for example in the first sutta of
this section (par1, Dire) that the Buddha said to the monks:

@quotation

Dire, monks, are gains, favours and flattery, a bitter, harsh obstacle
in the way of arriving at uttermost safety. 

Wherefore, monks, thus should you train yourselves:- 

``When gains, favour and flattery come to us, we will put them aside,
nor when they come shall they take lasting hold on our hearts.'' 

@end quotation

Why did the Buddha stress so repeatedly the danger of attachment to
gains, favours and flattery? Because our happiness seems to depend
entirely on the getting of the pleasant ``worldly conditions''. Don't
they play an all-important role in our life? We want to be treated
well by others, we consider ourselves very important and we forget
that gain, loss, honour and dishonour are dependant on conditions,
that they are beyond control. We cannot exert control over what will
happen next: gain or loss, honour or dishonour. The Buddha explained
that desire is the root of sorrow, but we may not fully understand
this truth. Only right understanding which has been developed can see
the truth of the Buddha's words. 

Precise understanding of all the different phenomena of our life has
to be developed. We usually pay attention only to pleasant or
unpleasant sense objects, and we tend to overlook realities such as
seeing or hearing. We should remember that when we experience praise
or blame there are many different types of cittas. The cittas which
see or hear pleasant or unpleasant objects are vipākacittas,
conditioned by kamma which was committed already, and we cannot
prevent them from arising. The moment of vipākacitta such as hearing
which merely experiences sound is different from akusala citta which
may arise shortly afterwards and which experiences sound in an
unwholesome way, for example with attachment or aversion. Then there
are other processes of cittas, cittas which may think in an
unwholesome way about concepts. We may, for example, think for a long
time about the wrongs other people committed towards us. If one is
ignorant of vipāka one will be inclined to continually blame others
for unpleasant objects which are received through the senses. We
should know vipākacittas such as seeing and hearing as well as the
other types of cittas. When we realize how ignorant we still are we
will be reminded to go on developing right understanding. Through
right understanding we will gradually learn to attach less importance
to ``self'', and as a consequence we will be inclined to think more of
other people's happiness instead of our own happiness.

In the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (V, Mahā-vagga, Kindred Sayings on the
Way, Book I, Chapter VIII) we read about groups of akusala dhammas and
their eradication. We read, for example, about the floods:

@quotation

Monks, there are four floods. What four? The flood of sensual desire,
the flood of becoming, the flood of view, the flood of nescience.
These are the four. It is for the full comprehension, realization,
wearing down and abandoning of these four floods that the ariyan
eightfold way must be cultivated.

@end quotation

We read the same about other groups of defilements, such as the yokes,
knots, latent tendencies, hindrances, the lower fetters and the higher
fetters. We read at the end of this section, after the summing up of
the higher fetters:

@quotation
@dots{}It is for the full comprehension, the realization, wearing down
and abandoning of these five fetters of the higher sort that the
ariyan eightfold way must be cultivated.
@dots{}And how does a monk cultivate the ariyan eightfold way?

Herein a monk cultivates right view, right thinking, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
concentration, that ends in the restraint of lust, of hatred, of
illusion; that plunges into the deathless, that has the deathless for
its goal, that ends in the deathless; that flows to nibbāna, that
slides to nibbāna, that tends to nibbāna.

It is for the full comprehension, for the realization, for the wearing
out and abandoning of these five fetters of the higher sort, monks,
that this ariyan eightfold way must be cultivated.

@end quotation

Before there can be abandoning of akusala dhammas, there must be right
understanding of all nāmas and rūpas of our daily life.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
We have accumulated all kinds of akusala, from life to life. Why then
are there only seven akusala dhammas which are classified as latent
tendencies?

@item
Who has eradicated the five lower fetters?

@item
Who has eradicated the five higher fetters? 

@end enumerate

@unnumbered PART IV: Beautiful Cetasikas

@node Beautiful Cetasikas
@chapter Beautiful Cetasikas
@section Introduction

When we perform dāna, observe sīla, apply ourselves to the development
of calm or the development of insight there is kusala citta. Kusala
citta is accompanied by sobhana (beautiful) cetasikas and these assist
the citta in performing its task. When there is kusala citta there is
no attachment, aversion or ignorance, one is temporarily free from
defilements. However, after the kusala cittas have fallen away there
are bound to be akusala cittas. There are many more akusala cittas in
our life than kusala cittas. 

Kusala citta does not often arise since we have accumulated so many
defilements. Each kusala citta is accompanied by non-attachment
(alobha), but this quality seems to be against our nature. We are
absorbed in and infatuated with the objects we experience through the
six doors. We want pleasant objects for ourselves and it is our nature
to think of ourselves in the first place. Akusala is deeply rooted and
so long as latent tendencies have not been eradicated akusala citta is
bound to arise time and again. Even if we try not to be stingy,
jealous or proud, these defilements still arise. There is no self who
has authority over the cittas which arise, cittas are not self. When
we experience a beautiful object attachment tends to arise and when we
experience an unpleasant object aversion tends to arise. 

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Ones, Chapter II,
par1-5):

@quotation

Monks, I know not of any other single thing of such power to cause the
arising of sensual lust, if not already arisen, or, if arisen, to
cause its more-becoming and increase, as the feature of beauty (in
things).

In him who pays not wise attention to the feature of beauty, sensual
lust, if not already arisen, arises; or, if already arisen, is liable
to more becoming and increase.

Monks, I know not of any other single thing of such power to cause the
arising of malevolence, if not already arisen, or, if arisen, to cause
its more-becoming and increase, as the repulsive feature (of things).

In him who pays not wise attention to the repulsive feature,
malevolence, if not already arisen, arises; or, if arisen, it is
liable to more-becoming and increase.

@end quotation

It may seem to us that a desirable object is the fundamental cause of
attachment and an unpleasant object the fundamental cause of
aversion@footnote{Atthasālinī I, Part II, Chapter I, 75.}. However,
the real cause of akusala is not in the object which is experienced.
Whether akusala citta or kusala citta arises, depends on one's
accumulations. There can be wise attention or unwise attention to the
object, depending on conditions. When there is wise attention to the
object we see the value of kusala and we have confidence in kusala.
However, more often akusala citta arises and then there is unwise
attention to the object. It is possible to change our habits and
develop kusala. Gradually our accumulations can be changed through the
study of the Dhamma and the development of right understanding. 

Through the study of the Dhamma we may begin to realize that
conditioned realities do not last, that they are impermanent. We may
remember more often that it is useless to cling to our possessions
since our life is short and we cannot take our possessions with us
when we die. The Buddha explained that it is difficult to be reborn in
the human plane where there is an opportunity to hear the Dhamma and
to develop right understanding of realities. We should therefore not,
like fools, waste our life with akusala. 

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (I, Sagāthā-vagga, The Devas,
Chapter IV, par 6, Faith): 

@example
@dots{}It is a fool's part heedless to waste his life:---
Such are the folk who will not understand.
He who is wise does foster earnestness
As he were watching over his chiefest wealth.
Give not yourselves to wastage in your lives,
Nor be familiar with delights of sense. 
He who does strenuously meditate,
His shall it be to win the bliss supreme.

@end example

The person who with courage and perseverance develops right
understanding will win ``the bliss supreme'', he will eventually
attain arahatship. The Buddha pointed out the dangers and
disadvantages of akusala, its ill effects both in this life and in the
lives to come. It is right understanding which sees the disadvantage
of akusala and the benefit of kusala. We can find out from our own
experience that happiness connected with attachment makes us restless,
since attachment can never be satisfied, and that generosity and
consideration for others can condition peace of mind. We may be
inclined to anger, but when we see the value of kusala we can develop
loving kindness. We may be inclined to stinginess, but when we see the
value of generosity there are conditions for generosity instead of
stinginess. The kusala citta which arises falls away immediately but
kusala is accumulated and thus there is a condition for the arising of
kusala citta again later on. Mindfulness of nāma and rūpa is
difficult so long as sati has not been accumulated. If we see that
right understanding cannot grow without mindfulness of the reality
appearing at the present moment, there are conditions for the arising
of mindfulness more often. There is no other moment but the present
moment in which we can develop right understanding. The Buddha used
the simile of the well-trained horse, the ``thorough-bred'', in order
to point out that right understanding should be developed. A horse
does not become well-trained in one day, he has to practise certain
things over and over again. In the same way we should not expect to
attain enlightenment without developing right understanding. 

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Sixes, Chapter I,
par5, The thorough-bred):

@quotation

Monks, a rajah's goodly thorough-bred endowed with six points is fit
for a rajah, is a rajah's asset, is reckoned a rajah's portion. What
six?

Herein, monks, the goodly thorough-bred endures forms, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches and has beauty@dots{}Even so, monks, a monk with six
qualities is worthy of offerings@dots{}the world's peerless field
for merit. What six?

Herein, monks, a monk endures forms, sounds, smells, tastes, touches
and things of the mind.

Verily, monks, a monk with these six qualities is worthy of
offerings@dots{}

@end quotation

One will learn to ``endure'' the objects which present themselves
through the six doors by the development of right understanding of
realities. At the moment of mindfulness of the reality which appears
paññā can investigate it so that it will be seen as it is: only a nāma
or a rūpa, not self. Eventually one will no longer be absorbed in and
infatuated with the objects which are experienced. 

In order to be able to apply oneself to the development of kusala and
in particular to the development of right understanding, there have to
be the right conditions for it. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (Part II,
Chapter I, 75) mentions these right conditions: residence in a
suitable place, dependence on good associates, hearing the ``good
Dhamma'', merit performed in former existences. It is helpful to live
in a country or place where one can hear the Dhamma and learn to
develop the Path which leads to the eradication of defilements. In
order to learn how to be mindful of nāma and rūpa one should associate
with the good friend in Dhamma (kalyāṇa-mitta) who can explain the
Dhamma in the right way. 

What are the qualities the good friend in Dhamma should have? We read
in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (III, no. 110, Lesser Discourse at
the time of a Full Moon) that the Buddha, while he was staying near
Sāvatthī, in the palace of Migāra's mother, in the Eastern Monastery,
spoke to the monks about the bad man (asappurisa) and the good man
(sappurisa). We read about the good friends a good man consorts with:
@dots{}And how, monks, does a good man consort with good men? As to
this, monks, those recluses and brahmans who have faith (saddhā),
shame, fear of blame, who have heard much, are of stirred up energy,
whose mindfulness is aroused, who have wisdom---these are the friends
and companions of that good man. It is thus, monks, that a good man
consorts with good men@dots{}

The ariyan is endowed with the qualities of the good men, mentioned in
the sutta. He has an unshakable confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma
and the Sangha, and in wholesomeness. How can we find out who is an
ariyan? So long as we have not attained enlightenment ourselves we
cannot know who is an ariyan. It depends on conditions whether someone
will meet an ariyan or not. However, we can find out whether our
friend in the Dhamma helps us to develop right understanding or not. 

The Buddha taught that all realities are anattā, non-self, but it is
extremely hard to become more detached from the self in the situations
of daily life. We think of ourselves most of the time, we want to get
pleasant things for ourselves. When we associate with the good friend
in the Dhamma we can learn to develop right understanding and then
there will eventually be less clinging to the concept of self. The
person who has developed right understanding and encourages others
through his example to be less selfish and more considerate for others
is a true friend in the Dhamma. He does not pay mere lip-service to
the Dhamma, but he practises the Dhamma in his daily life. 

``Hearing the good Dhamma'' is also a necessary factor for the
development of kusala. We should not listen passively; when we truly
listen, we consider what we hear and apply it; otherwise the listening
is not fruitful.

Another factor which conditions the development of kusala is
``meritorious deeds done in the past''. If someone has applied himself
to dāna, sīla and bhāvanā in the past he has conditions for confidence
in kusala today. 

The consideration of the conditions for kusala can remind us of the
fact that nothing arises without the appropriate conditions. Kusala
citta does not belong to a self; there is no self who can direct the
arising of kusala citta.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part II, Chapter I, 62) states about
kusala:

@quotation

By kusala is meant (moral) ``good'' in the sense of destroying or
disturbing contemptible states; or in the sense of wholesomeness,
faultlessness, and accomplishment by skill@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} explains that the word ``kusala'' can be used
in the sense of healthy, not being sick in body. When the word kusala
is used for mental phenomena, ``it should be understood in the sense
of 'health', i.e., absence of sickness, illness or disease through the
'corruptions'. Moreover, from the absence of the faultiness, hate, and
torments of the 'corruptions', kusala has the sense of
faultlessness.'' 

The @emph{Atthasālinī}, in the same section (63), defines kusala as
follows:

@quotation

its characteristic is that it has faultless, happy results,

its function is the destruction of immoralities,

its manifestation is purity,

its proximate cause is wise attention.

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} gives a second method of defining kusala:

@quotation

its characteristic is faultlessness by being opposed to fault,

its function is purity,

its manifestation is desirable results,

its proximate cause is wise attention.

@end quotation

The @emph{characteristic} of kusala, according to the first
definition, is that it has pleasant results, whereas, according to the
second definition, pleasant results are the @emph{manifestation} of
kusala. Classifications are not rigid and by means of different
methods of classification different aspects are shown. Pleasant
results can be experienced in daily life, they are a manifestation of
the fact that good deeds have been performed. Whenever we see, hear,
smell, taste or touch a pleasant object there is kusala vipākacitta,
the result of a good deed. The moments of vipākacitta fall away
immediately, they are only conditioned elements which do not last.
When this truth has not been realized there is bound to be clinging to
pleasant objects and sadness when these objects are gone. 

The characteristic of kusala, according to the second definition, is
faultlessness by being opposed to fault. At the moment of kusala citta
there is no opportunity for akusala citta. When there is an
opportunity for kusala it should not be neglected. There are
opportunities for kusala right at hand, such as a kind word, a thought
of appreciation of other people's good qualities, or a moment of
mindfulness of realities such as hardness, softness, sound or hearing. 

We should find out whether there is at this moment, on account of what
is seen, kusala citta or akusala citta. We are usually absorbed in the
details of the things around us, but sometimes there can be confidence
in the value of awareness of the reality which appears now. Even if we
are only beginners and there is not yet clear understanding of nāma
and rūpa, there can be confidence in awareness of the present reality
and then there are kusala cittas.

The function of kusala, according to the first definition, is the
destruction of akusala. Akusala cannot be eradicated unless right
understanding of realities has been developed, but this does not mean
that dāna or sīla should be neglected. Through right understanding the
wrong view of self can be eliminated, but, if there is no development
of generosity and we keep on clinging to our possessions, how could
there ever be detachment from the self? It is beneficial to develop
all kinds of kusala for which we have accumulations, but when it is
developed together with right understanding of realities akusala can
eventually be eradicated.

Purity is the manifestation of kusala according to the first
definition, whereas in the second definition purity is the function of
kusala. When the citta is akusala, it is impure, unclean. When we are
attached to an object we experience, we are enslaved and at such a
moment the citta is not pure. Whereas when there is kusala citta there
is no enslavement, no selfishness; the citta is pure, free from
defilements. If we know the difference between akusala citta and
kusala citta we can understand that purity is a quality of kusala
citta. 

According to both definitions, the proximate cause of kusala is wise
attention. When there is akusala citta there is unwise attention to
the object and when there is kusala citta there is wise attention to
the object. When there is wise attention, there is no infatuation with
the object, there is no aversion, no ignorance. Seeing realities as
they are conditions wise attention. The arahat has the highest degree
of wise attention: for him defilements do not arise on account of any
object he experiences, no matter it is pleasant or unpleasant.

Kusala citta does not arise alone, it is accompanied by cetasikas: by
the @emph{universals} (sabbacitta sādhāranā), the cetasikas which
accompany each citta, by @emph{particulars} (pakiṇṇakā), cetasikas
which accompany cittas of the four classes (jātis) of kusala, akusala,
vipāka and kiriya@footnote{See Introduction.} , but which do not
accompany each citta, and by @emph{sobhana cetasikas}, beautiful
cetasikas. Kusala citta cannot be accompanied by akusala cetasikas.
One may wonder why the term ``sobhana'' and not the term ``kusala'' is
used for cetasikas which accompany kusala citta. The reason is that
sobhana cetasikas do not only accompany kusala cittas, but also cittas
of the jātis which are vipāka and kiriya@footnote{There are also
vipāka-cittas and kiriyacittas which are not sobhana cittas, namely
ahetuka (rootless) vipākacittas and ahetuka kiriyacittas. See
Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 19.}. All the cittas which are
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas are called sobhana cittas. 

There are twenty four sobhana cittas of the sense-sphere, kāma-sobhana
cittas. They are:
@itemize

@item
8 mahā-kusala cittas@footnote{Mahā means great. Here the term is used
in the case of sobhana cittas of the sense-sphere.} 

@item
8 mahā-vipākacittas

@item
8 mahā-kiriyacittas@footnote{The arahat has, instead of mahā-kusala
cittas, mahā-kiriyacittas.}

@end itemize

Cittas of the sense-sphere can be sobhana cittas, cittas accompanied
by sobhana cetasikas, or asobhana cittas, cittas which are not
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas. Cittas of the planes of
consciousness other than the sensuous plane are always sobhana cittas.
Those who have developed calm to the stage of absorption, jhāna, have
jhāna-cittas and these are sobhana cittas. There are rūpa-jhānacittas
or rūpāvacara cittas and arūpa-jhānacittas or arūpāvacara cittas.
Rūpa-jhāna can be translated as ``fine-material'' jhāna and
arūpa-jhāna can be translated as ``immaterial'' jhāna. Arūpa-jhāna is
more refined than rūpa-jhāna since the meditation subjects of
arūpa-jhāna are not dependant on materiality. 

The sobhana cittas which are rūpāvacara cittas, pertaining to five
stages of rūpa-jhāna, are the following:

@itemize

@item
5 rūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item
5 rūpāvacara vipākacittas

@item
5 rūpāvacara kiriyacittas (of the arahat)
@end itemize

The sobhana cittas which are arūpāvacara cittas, pertaining to four
stages of arūpa-jhāna, are the following: 

@itemize

@item
4 arūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item
4 arūpāvacara vipākacittas

@item
4 arūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@end itemize

Apart from the sobhana cittas which are jhānacittas, there are sobhana
cittas which are lokuttara cittas, supramundane cittas experiencing
nibbāna. There are @emph{eight lokuttara cittas}, but when one takes
into account the lokuttara cittas which are accompanied by
jhāna-factors of the different stages of jhāna, there are @emph{forty
lokuttara cittas}@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter 22.
}. 

When cittas are counted as @emph{eighty nine} (not including lokuttara
cittas accompanied by jhāna-factors of the different stages of jhāna),
there are @emph{fifty nine sobhana cittas}, and when cittas are
counted as @emph{hundred-and-twenty-one} (including forty lokuttara
cittas accompanied by jhāna-factors), there are @emph{ninety-one}
@emph{sobhana cittas}. 

Sobhana cittas are accompanied by the universals, by particulars and
by sobhana cetasikas. There are @emph{twenty five sobhana cetasikas in
all} which can accompany sobhana cittas. Not all twenty five sobhana
cetasikas accompany each sobhana citta, but @emph{at least nineteen
sobhana cetasikas} have to accompany each sobhana citta.

Among the twenty five sobhana cetasikas @emph{three are sobhana hetus}
(roots). These are:

@itemize

@item
non-attachment, alobha

@item
non-aversion, adosa 

@item
wisdom, amoha or paññā
@end itemize

Non-attachment and non-aversion have to accompany each sobhana citta,
and wisdom or understanding may or may not accompany sobhana citta. 

Each sobhana cetasika has its own specific characteristic, function,
manifestation and proximate cause (immediate occasion). When we
perform dāna, observe sīla, apply ourselves to the development of
calm, samatha, or insight, vipassanā, sobhana cetasikas assist the
kusala citta in carrying out its task of wholesomeness.

The sobhana vipākacittas are also accompanied by at least nineteen
sobhana cetasikas. Vipākacittas do not perform deeds, they are
results. Sobhana vipākacittas are results of deeds which are performed
by kusala cittas accompanied by sobhana cetasikas. The
rebirth-consciousness, for example, can be the result of a deed
performed by kusala citta accompanied by sobhana hetus and other
sobhana cetasikas. In that case it is sahetuka vipākacitta (with
hetus). 

The arahat does not perform kusala kamma, he is free from the cycle of
birth and death. Thus, instead of kusala cittas he has kiriyacittas
which are accompanied by sobhana hetus and other sobhana cetasikas.
Sobhana kiriyacittas are accompanied by at least nineteen sobhana
cetasikas. 

@node Confidence
@chapter Confidence
@section Confidence (saddhā)

Saddhā, confidence or faith, is one of the sobhana cetasikas which
arises with each sobhana citta: with the sobhana cittas of the
sense-sphere (kāma-sobhana cittas), with the rūpāvacara cittas, with
the arūpāvacara cittas and with the lokuttara cittas. Saddhā is not
blind faith in a person, it is confidence in wholesomeness. There is
saddhā with dāna, with sīla and with bhāvanā. There cannot be any kind
of wholesomeness without saddhā. Saddhā is called by the
@emph{Atthasālinī} the ``forerunner'' of wholesomeness.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 119) states about
saddhā:

@quotation
@dots{}It has purifying or aspiring as its characteristic. As the
water-purifying gem of the universal monarch thrown into water causes
solids, alluvia, waterweeds and mud to subside and makes the water
clear, transparent and undisturbed, so faith arising discards the
hindrances, causes the corruptions to subside, purifies the mind and
makes it undisturbed; the mind being purified, the aspirant of noble
family gives gifts, observes the precepts, performs the duties of
``uposatha''@footnote{Uposatha days are days of fasting or vigil;
uposatha is observed on the days of full-moon and new-moon, and
sometimes also on the days of the first and last moon-quarter. In
Buddhist countries there is a tradition for lay-followers to visit
temples and to observe eight precepts on these days.} , and commences
bhāvanā. Thus faith should be known to have purifying as its
characteristic@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} refers to a simile given in the @emph{Questions
of King Milinda} (35)@footnote{Containing discussions on Dhamma
between King Milinda and the arahat Nāgasena. This work which is not
part of the Tipiṭaka must have been written before the time of
Buddhaghosa, but its date is not known. It gives most valuable
explanations of the Buddhist teachings and it often refers to the
texts of the Tipiṭaka.} : a universal monarch crosses a small stream
with his army. The water has been polluted by the army but his
water-purifying gem purifies the water so that mud, sand and
waterweeds subside and the water becomes clear and undisturbed. The
water which is disturbed by pollution is like the mind which is
disturbed by defilements. Faith purifies the mind so that it becomes
clear, transparent and undisturbed. 

As to the characteristic of ``aspiring'', the @emph{Atthasālinī} uses
another simile in order to explain this. A crowd standing on both
banks of a great river full of crocodiles, monsters, sharks and ogres,
is afraid to cross over. A hero crosses the river and repels the
dangerous animals with his sword, and leads the crowd in crossing
over. The @emph{Atthasālinī} ( 120) states:

@quotation
@dots{}So faith is the forerunner, the precursor to one who is
giving gifts, observing the precepts, performing the duties of
uposatha and commencing bhāvanā. Hence it has been said: Faith has
purifying and aspiring as its characteristic. 

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} also uses another method of defining saddhā:

@quotation
@dots{}Faith has confiding as its characteristic; purifying as its
function, like the water-purifying gem, or aspiring faith as function,
like the crossing of the floods; freedom from pollution or decision as
its manifestation; an object worthy of faith or factors of
``streamwinning'' as its proximate cause.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 140) defines confidence in the same way
as the @emph{Atthasālinī} in the second method.

When there is akusala citta there is no confidence in kusala. For
example, when we are attached to a pleasant sight or when we have
aversion towards an ugly sight, there is forgetfulness of kusala,
there is no aspiration for it. Whereas, when there is faith or
confidence, there is aspiration for kusala. Only when people have
confidence in the value of dāna, sīla or bhāvanā will they apply
themselves to it. It depends on a person's accumulations which kind of
kusala he is inclined to perform. Some people have confidence in dāna
and sīla but they do not see the benefit of being aware right now of
seeing or hearing, in order to know these realities as non-self. 

As we have seen, purifying has been mentioned as a function of
confidence and freedom from pollution as one of its manifestations.
When the citta is accompanied by confidence, it is pure, free from the
hindrances. But so long as latent tendencies have not been eradicated
defilements are bound to arise, time and again. The purity of
confidence is in the ariyan of a higher degree than in the non-ariyan.
The sotāpanna does not cling to the concept of self, he has eradicated
wrong view, and thus his good deeds are purer. His sīla is more
purified than the sīla of the non-ariyan, he has no more conditions to
transgress the five precepts. 

Another manifestation of confidence is decision or resolution. When
there is determination to accomplish kusala, it is evident that there
is confidence in kusala. There is no self who decides for kusala, it
depends on conditions whether kusala citta arises or not. When there
are conditions for aversion and discouragement, there is no resolution
for kusala. We may have no energy for any kind of kusala when we feel
annoyed because of our shortcomings, or when we are disappointed about
other people, when we feel lonely and depressed, when we find life
useless and frustrating. When we are depressed we are self-centred. We
want pleasant objects for ourselves and when we do not get these we
feel dissatisfied with life. If there would be less clinging to the
self there would be less conditions for feelings of frustration. Right
understanding can eventually eradicate the clinging to the self, but
it can only develop very gradually. If we are impatient because we do
not notice any progress in the development of right understanding, we
should remember the patience and determination of the Buddha in the
lives when he was still a Bodhisatta. He was determined to develop
right understanding life after life, without becoming discouraged,
without coming to a halt halfway. Courage and patience are needed in
order to develop understanding of the realities appearing in daily
life. One has to have ``aspiring confidence'' like the hero who
crosses the floods. It is useless to worry about the lack of
mindfulness, or to think of ways to make it arise. When there is more
understanding of what the object of mindfulness is, an ultimate
reality, there are conditions for mindfulness now of whatever reality
appears.

``An object worthy of faith'' is a proximate cause of confidence. The
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha are objects worthy of confidence.
This does not mean that someone who never heard of the Dhamma cannot
have confidence. Confidence is an ultimate reality with its own
characteristic, it is not specifically Buddhist. Each kusala citta is
accompanied by confidence; kusala is kusala, no matter what
nationality or race one is, no matter what faith one professes. Also
those who never heard of the Dhamma can have confidence in ways of
kusala such as generosity and true loving kindness. Also good deeds
are objects worthy of confidence. If one listens to the Dhamma and
develops right understanding there are conditions for the eradication
of akusala and thus there will be more opportunity for the development
of wholesomeness.

The ``factors of streamwinning'', that is the factors, necessary for
attaining the first stage of enlightenment, the stage of the
``streamwinner'' or sotāpanna, are also a proximate cause for
confidence. These factors are: association with the right friend,
hearing the Dhamma, wise attention and practice in accordance with the
Dhamma@footnote{Dialogues of the Buddha, III, 33, Sangīti Sutta, 227.
}. Confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha starts with
listening to the Dhamma as it is explained by the right friend. We
read in many suttas that people first listened to the Buddha,
considered what they heard and then took their refuge in the Buddha,
the Dhamma and the Sangha. Their confidence was based on listening,
inquiring and considering.

We read in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (I, no. 4, Discourse on
Fear and Dread) that the Buddha, while staying near Sāvatthī, in the
Jeta Grove, spoke to the Brahman Jāṇussoṇi about his living in the
forest without fear and dread, and his attainment to Buddhahood.
Jāṇussoṇi, after he listened to the Buddha, took his refuge in the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha with the following words:

@quotation
@dots{}Excellent, good Gotama, excellent, good Gotama. It is as if
one might set upright what had been upset, or might disclose what was
covered, or show the way to one who had gone astray, or bring an
oil-lamp into the darkness so that those with vision might see
material shapes---even so in many a figure has dhamma been made clear
by the reverend Gotama. Thus I am going to the reverend Gotama for
refuge, to the Dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the reverend
Gotama accept me as a layfollower going for refuge from today forth
for as long as life lasts.

@end quotation

Some people have confidence to become a lay-disciple and others have
confidence to become a monk, it depends on one's accumulated
inclinations. There are also people who are inclined to listen, but
who do not gain enough confidence to practise the teachings. It may
not be the right time for them to begin with the development of the
Path, but in a future life they may listen again and then gain enough
confidence to practise the teachings. We should find out for ourselves
whether our confidence is to the degree that we apply the Dhamma we
have heard or not yet. If one has enough confidence one will continue
to develop right understanding until enlightenment is attained and all
doubt and wrong view are eradicated.

There is still another aspect to confidence, saddhā, and that is the
aspect of indriya, controlling faculty. An indriya exercises
leadership over the dhammas it accompanies. There are five wholesome
cetasikas, indriyas, called the ``spiritual faculties'', which should
be developed. They are: confidence, energy, mindfulness, concentration
and wisdom. These faculties overcome the defilements which are their
opposites. Confidence governs the accompanying dhammas, citta and
cetasikas, in its quality of purifying and of confiding in kusala. It
overcomes lack of confidence in kusala. Without confidence kusala
citta and its accompanying cetasikas could not arise. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 119) states: 

@quotation

``From the overcoming of lack of faith, faith is a controlling faculty
in the sense of predominance, or in its characteristic of decision it
exercises lordship (over associated states).'' 

@end quotation

When the ``spiritual faculties'' have been developed they become
``powers'' or ``strengths'' (balas). Then they have become firm and
unshakable, they cannot be shaken by the defilements which are their
opposites. The same cetasikas which can be considered under the aspect
of indriya can also be considered under the aspect of power. We read
in the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} about confidence as faculty, indriya, and
as power, bala:

@quotation

The faith which on that occasion is a trusting in, the professing
confidence in, the sense of assurance, faith, faith as a faculty and
as a power---this is the faith that there then is.

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter II, 145) explains this
passage and states that assurance is abundant assurance in the virtues
of the Buddha. Such assurance is not based on mere theoretical
understanding of the Buddha's teachings. There can only be abundant
confidence in the Buddha's virtues when right understanding of
realities has been developed.

Those who want to develop calm to the degree of jhāna have to develop
the five ``spiritual faculties''. We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga}
(IV, 45-49), in the section on the conditions necessary for the
attainment of jhāna, that the faculties, indriyas, have to be
``balanced''. When any one of them is too strong and other faculties
weak, they cannot perform their functions. The faculty of faith has to
be balanced with the faculty of wisdom:

@quotation
@dots{}For one strong in faith and weak in understanding has
confidence uncritically and groundlessly. One strong in understanding
and weak in faith errs on the side of cunning and is as hard to cure
as one sick of a disease caused by medicine. With the balancing of the
two a man has confidence only when there are grounds for it@dots{}

@end quotation

Further on we read that concentration and faith must be balanced:
``One working on concentration needs strong faith, since it is with
such faith and confidence that he reaches absorption@dots{}'' 

The ``spiritual faculties'' have to be developed also for the
attainment of enlightenment and they must be balanced. How are the
faculties balanced in vipassanā? One may have confidence in the
Buddha's teachings but there may not be the development of right
understanding of realities and then confidence is not balanced with
the other faculties. But when there is the development of right
understanding of the present moment, there is also confidence and this
is balanced with understanding and the other faculties. 

When we are forgetful of realities there is no confidence in awareness
of the present moment. This may happen, for example, when we are
listening to the stories other people tell us and we are quite
absorbed in these stories. But sometimes there may be mindfulness of
one reality at a time, for example of sound, and then this can be
realized as only a rūpa, a reality which can be heard, not a voice or
a person. At such a moment there is confidence which sees the value of
right understanding. When we develop right understanding, we do not
have to aim at confidence, it arises already. Confidence grows to the
extent that right understanding develops. Through mindfulness of
nāma and rūpa, thus, through the development of the four
``Applications of Mindfulness'' (satipaṭṭhāna) the five spiritual
faculties develop together. 

As we have seen, when the faculty of confidence has been more
developed, it can become unshakable and firm, it can become a
``power'' or ``strength'' (bala). So long as one has not attained
enlightenment confidence can still be shaken. One may have doubt about
the value of the development of right understanding, doubt about the
eightfold Path. The confidence of the sotāpanna cannot be shaken
anymore; he has eradicated doubt. He has an unshakable confidence in
the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. At each stage of enlightenment
the faculties and thus also confidence have become more developed. At
the moment of the attainment of arahatship they have reached
completion.

As we have seen, one of the proximate causes of confidence is an
object worthy of confidence. The Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha are
objects worthy of confidence. So long as we are not ariyans we do not
really understand what enlightenment means; we have only theoretical
understanding about it and thus our knowledge is very limited. We take
our refuge in the Buddha, but our confidence in his virtues cannot be
as strong as the sotāpanna's confidence. The second Gem in which we
take refuge is the Dhamma. The term ``dhamma'' has many meanings, it
can stand for the teachings, or for paramattha dhamma, ultimate
reality. Seeing and attachment are real, they are dhammas. We do not
take our refuge in every dhamma. Nibbāna is lokuttara dhamma and this
is the second Gem, the Dhamma we take our refuge in. Also the eight
types of lokuttara cittas which experience nibbāna are included in the
second Gem; thus there are ``nine lokuttara dhammas'' in which we take
our refuge. Again, our understanding of the second Gem is limited so
long as we have not attained enlightenment. Our confidence in the
teachings which lead to enlightenment cannot be as strong as the
sotāpanna's confidence; he knows from experience what enlightenment
means. The ariyan Sangha is the third Gem in which we take our refuge.
We do not really know what it means to be an ariyan so long as we are
not ariyans ourselves and thus our confidence in the ariyan Sangha is
still weak.

When we realize how weak our confidence still is, we should not become
discouraged. When we think of all the virtues of the ariyan, his
unshakable confidence in wholesomeness, his purity of sīla and his
generosity, we should not forget that it all started with listening to
the Dhamma, considering it and developing right understanding. We read
in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (II, no. 70, Kīṭāgiri sutta) that
the Buddha, while he was in Kāsi, said that enlightenment could not be
attained without diligence. He spoke to the monks about people with
different accumulations who attained enlightenment, and then said:

@quotation

I, monks, do not say that the attainment of profound knowledge comes
straightaway; nevertheless, monks, the attainment of profound
knowledge comes by a gradual training, a gradual doing, a gradual
course. And how, monks, does the attainment of profound knowledge come
by means of a gradual training, a gradual doing, a gradual course? As
to this, monks, one who has faith draws close; drawing close, he sits
down near by; sitting down near by he lends ear; lending ear he hears
dhamma; having heard dhamma he remembers it; he tests the meaning of
the things he has borne in mind; while testing the meaning the things
are approved of; there being approval of the things
desire@footnote{kusalacchanda, ``wish-to-do'' which is kusala.} is
born; with desire born he makes an effort; having made the effort he
weighs it up; having weighed it up he strives; being self-resolute he
realizes himself the highest truth itself and, penetrating it by means
of wisdom, he sees@dots{}

@end quotation

The ariyan is often described as a person who has heard much. He has
listened to Dhamma and has applied what he has heard. If he had been a
passive listener he could not have attained enlightenment. We may wish
to reach the goal without cultivating the right cause which leads to
the goal. If there is no beginning of the development of understanding
at this moment how can we expect the arising of profound wisdom?
Realities such as hardness, feeling or sound appear time and again. If
one begins to be mindful of the reality which appears now, one
cultivates the right conditions for the growth of right understanding.
There should be confidence which is as courageous and determined as
the hero who crosses the flood. Many moments of such courageous
determination are needed in order to realize what one has not yet
realized.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
Which are objects worthy of confidence?

@item
Can confidence arise with mahā-vipākacitta?

@item
How do we know when there is confidence?

@item
How can confidence grow?

@item
What hinders confidence?

@item
Why is the sotāpanna's confidence ``unshakable''?

@item
How is confidence ``balanced'' with the other spiritual faculties in
vipassanā?

@item
At which moment is there confidence in the development of the four
Applications of Mindfulness?

@item
People can take their refuge in the Triple Gem with confidence, but
why is the confidence of the non-ariyan still weak in comparison with
the confidence of the ariyan?
@end enumerate

@node Mindfulness
@chapter Mindfulness
@section Mindfulness (sati)
When we apply ourselves to generosity, dāna, to morality, sīla, or to
mental development, bhāvanā, there is confidence, saddhā, with the
kusala citta. Without confidence in the value of kusala we could not
perform any kind of kusala. Kusala citta does not only need confidence
in order to perform its task, it also needs mindfulness, sati, which
is heedful, non-forgetful, of kusala. There are many opportunities for
generosity, for morality and for mental development, but we are often
forgetful of kusala and we waste such opportunities. When mindfulness
arises there is heedfulness of kusala and then the opportunity for
kusala which presents itself is not wasted. There has to be
mindfulness with dāna, with sīla, with samatha and with the
development of insight.

Mindfulness, sati, is one of the nineteen sobhana cetasikas which have
to arise with each sobhana citta. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV,
Chapter I, 121) states that the characteristic of mindfulness is ``not
floating away''. Mindfulness ``does not allow the floating away of
moral states'', such as the four applications of mindfulness and the
other factors leading to enlightenment. Another characteristic of
mindfulness the @emph{Atthasālinī} mentions is ``acquiring'' or
``taking up''@footnote{In Pali: upagaṇhanā.}, that is, acquirement of
what is useful and beneficial. Mindfulness, when it arises, ``searches
well the courses of states, advantageous and disadvantageous:
---'these states are advantageous, those disadvantageous, these states
are serviceable, those not serviceable'---and then removes the
disadvantageous and takes up the advantageous.'' 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} then gives another definition of mindfulness:

@quotation
@dots{}Mindfulness has ``not floating away'' as its characteristic,
unforgetfulness as its function, guarding, or the state of facing the
object, as its manifestation, firm remembrance (saññā) or application
in mindfulness as regards the body, etc. , as proximate cause. It
should be regarded as a door-post from being firmly established in the
object, and as a door-keeper from guarding the door of the senses.

@end quotation

The definition of mindfulness in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 141)
is similar to this definition. 

Mindfulness is non-forgetful of what is kusala and it keeps us from
akusala. Also those who do not know about the Dhamma are able to
perform wholesome deeds, but it is through the Dhamma that one can
know more precisely what is kusala and what is akusala. Association
with the good friend in Dhamma, listening to the Dhamma and
considering it are most helpful conditions for mindfulness in the
field of dāna, sīla, samatha and insight, thus, for all levels of
mindfulness. The generosity, the patience and all the other good
qualities of the true friend in Dhamma can remind one to develop such
qualities as well.

There are different ways of kusala and in order to be more heedful of
what is wholesome, it is helpful to know more in detail about them.
Dāna, generosity, for example, is not only the giving away of useful
things. There are also other ways of generosity included in dāna, such
as expressing our appreciation of someone else's kusala (anumodhanā
dāna). We may be stingy as to words of praise or we are lazy with
regard to kusala and then we let opportunities for such a way of
generosity go by. It is mindfulness which is non-forgetful of this way
of generosity when the opportunity arises. Another form of generosity
is to give someone else, no matter he lives in this world or in some
other plane of existence, the opportunity to rejoice in our good
deeds, so that he has kusala citta as well. It is mindfulness, not
self, which is heedful of kusala. Without mindfulness it is
impossible to perform any kind of kusala. 

Abstaining from ill deeds is a way of kusala included in sīla. The
Buddha explained in detail what is right and what is wrong. We should
consider his words and test their meaning. Then we can verify
ourselves the truth of his teachings. Before we studied the Dhamma we
may not have known that also the killing of insects, for example, is
akusala. Through the Dhamma we acquire more understanding of our
different cittas, of kusala cittas and akusala cittas. We come to
understand that killing is motivated by dosa and that the killing of
any living being, insects included, is akusala kamma which can produce
akusala vipāka. When we see the disadvantages of all kinds of akusala
there are conditions for the arising of mindfulness which is heedful,
non-forgetful of abstaining from akusala.

Through the Dhamma we learn about different ways of kusala. Before we
studied the Dhamma we may not have known that politeness and respect
are ways of kusala kamma. Politeness and respect which are expressed
by gestures or words are forms of sīla. When there is an opportunity
for such a way of kusala, mindfulness may arise and be non-forgetful
of it, so that this opportunity is not wasted; that is the function of
mindfulness.

There is not only mindfulness which is non-forgetful of dāna or of
sīla, there is also mindfulness with mental development. The
development of calm, samatha, is one way of mental development. There
is mindfulness with the kusala citta which develops calm. There are
many degrees of calm. Jhāna, absorption, is a high level of calm and
it is extremely difficult to attain this level; one can only attain
jhāna if one has accumulations for it and if there is right
understanding of its way of development. One may have no accumulations
for jhāna, but there can be moments of calm in daily life. For
example, if there is right understanding of the characteristic of
loving kindness, which is one of the meditation subjects of samatha,
this quality can be developed in daily life and then there is calm
conditioned by loving kindness. When there is calm, no matter of what
degree, there is also mindfulness of the object of calm, be it loving
kindness, compassion, the recollection of the Buddha or any other
object of samatha. 

The study of the Dhamma is included in mental development. When we
study the Dhamma with the aim to have more understanding of realities
there is mindfulness at that moment. When we study the Dhamma and
consider it there is intellectual understanding of realities and this
is different from direct understanding of the reality which appears at
the present moment. Intellectual understanding is a necessary
foundation for the development of direct understanding or insight,
vipassanā. 

In order to understand what mindfulness of vipassanā is, we should
know what its object is. The object of mindfulness in the development
of vipassanā is the nāma or rūpa which appears at the present moment.
Nāma and rūpa are ultimate realities, different from ``conventional
realities'' or concepts, such as person, mind, body, animal or tree.
Concepts are objects we can think of but they are not real in the
absolute sense. 

We should know the difference between ultimate realities and concepts.
If we only know concepts and not ultimate realities we believe that a
person or self really exists. We tend to think of a ``whole'' of mind
and body, of the human person. When we study the Dhamma we learn that
what we call mind are different types of citta accompanied by
different cetasikas, and that these change all the time. What we call
body are different rūpas, some of which are produced by kamma, some by
citta, some by temperature and some by nutrition. These rūpas arise
and then fall away, they change all the time. Through the study of the
Dhamma we learn about the different conditions for the cittas,
cetasikas and rūpas which arise. For instance, people are born with
different bodily features: some are beautiful, some are ugly, some are
strong in body, some are weak. Such differences are caused by kamma.
People have, as we say in conventional language, different characters,
and through the Dhamma we acquire a more precise understanding of the
conditions for their different characters. People had, in past lives,
different abilities, different inclinations, and these have been
accumulated from one moment of citta to the next moment of citta;
therefore, they can condition the citta arising at the present moment.
Kusala cittas and akusala cittas which arise are conditioned by
accumulated inclinations to wholesomeness and unwholesomeness. We have
pleasant experiences and unpleasant experiences through the senses and
these are conditioned phenomena, they are vipākacittas produced by
kamma. When we study the different conditions for the phenomena which
arise we will understand more clearly that they are only fleeting
phenomena, that there is no person or self who can exert control over
the events of life.

We are used to only paying attention to concepts, but through the
study of the Dhamma we learn to see the value of developing
understanding of ultimate realities, of nāma and rūpa. We learn
through the study of the Abhidhamma that the sense-objects are
experienced through their appropriate doorway by cittas which arise in
processes. Visible object is experienced through the eye-door by
cittas arising in the eye-door process. Tangible object such as
hardness is experienced through the body-door by cittas arising in the
body-door process. Each object is experienced through its appropriate
doorway; tangible object, for example, could not be experienced
through the eye-door. Only one object can be experienced at a time,
through one doorway; the different doorways should not be confused
with each other. When we only pay attention to concepts we think, for
example, that we can see and touch a flower. But in reality the seeing
sees only what is visible, visible object, and the body-consciousness
experiences tangible object such as hardness or softness. We can think
of a ``whole'' such as a flower because of remembrance of different
experiences through different doorways. The thinking is conditioned by
the seeing and other sense impressions. 

Nāma and rūpa appear one at a time and each one of them has its own
characteristic. These characteristics cannot be changed. Seeing, for
example, has its own characteristic; we can give it another name, but
its characteristic cannot be changed. Seeing is always seeing for
everybody, no matter an animal or any other living being sees.
Concepts are only objects of thinking, they are not realities with
their own characteristics, and thus they are not objects of which
right understanding is to be developed. Nāma and rūpa which are real
in the absolute sense are the objects of which right understanding
should be developed.

Only one reality at a time can be experienced by citta and thus also
mindfulness which accompanies the kusala citta can experience only one
object at a time. Since we are so used to paying attention to
``wholes'', to concepts such as people, cars or trees, we find it
difficult to consider only one reality at a time. When we know the
difference between the moments of thinking of concepts and the moments
that only one reality at a time, such as sound or hardness appears, we
will gradually have more understanding of what mindfulness is. 

In order to remind people of the truth of conditioned realities the
Buddha taught about six doors, the objects experienced through these
doorways and the realities which experience these objects. We read,
for example, in the @emph{Middle Length Sayings} (III, no. 148,
''Discourse on the Six Sixes'') that the Buddha, while he was staying
near Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove, explained to the monks:

@quotation
@dots{}When it is said, ``Six internal sense-fields are to be
understood'', in reference to what is it said? It is in reference to
the sense-field of eye, the sense-field of ear, the sense-field of
nose, the sense-field of tongue, the sense-field of body, the
sense-field of mind. When it is said, ``Six internal sense-fields are
to be understood'', it is said in reference to this. This is the first
Six.

When it is said, ``Six external sense-fields are to be understood'',
in reference to what is it said? It is in reference to the sense-field
of material shapes, the sense-field of sounds, the sense-field of
smells, the sense-field of tastes, the sense-field of touches, the
sense-field of mental states. When it is said, ``Six external
sense-fields are to be understood'', it is said in reference to this.
This is the second Six.

When it is said, ``Six classes of consciousness are to be
understood'', in reference to what is it said? It is in reference to
the visual consciousness that arises because of eye and material
shapes; the auditory consciousness that arises because of ear and
sounds; the olfactory consciousness that arises because of nose and
smells; the gustatory consciousness that arises because tongue and
tastes; the bodily consciousness that arises because of body and
touches; the mental consciousness that arises because of mind and
mental states. When it is said, ``Six classes of consciousness are to
be understood'', it is said in reference to this. This is the third
Six@dots{}

@end quotation

We then read about the six classes of impingement (contact or phassa),
about the six classes of feeling conditioned by those impingements and
about the six classes of craving conditioned by the six classes of
feeling. Direct understanding of all these realities which arise
because of their own conditions can eradicate the wrong view of self
and can eventually lead to ``turning away'', to detachment from
realities. 

This sutta reminds us that each reality which appears through one of
the six doors should be known separately, we should not confuse
different realities with each other. We are so used to the idea of
seeing people. However, the only object which can be seen is visible
object. If there is mindfulness of visible object when it appears we
will understand that visible object is a reality which can be
experienced through the eyesense, that it is not a person. We may find
it difficult to grasp this truth and we may wonder whether we have to
avoid thinking of concepts. We do not have to avoid this, then we
could not live our daily life. The citta which thinks of concepts is a
reality, it arises because of conditions and it can be known as only a
kind of nāma, not self. We can live our daily life as usual, thinking
of concepts and expressing ourselves by means of conventional
language, in terms of ``I'', ``self'' or ``person'', but at the same
time right understanding of nāma and rūpa can be developed. Even when
we think of people and talk to them, there are nāma and rūpa which
appear, and these can be objects of mindfulness.

The cetasika sati, mindfulness, is different from what is meant by
mindfulness in conventional language. Someone may think that he is
mindful when he directs his attention to what he is doing or to what
is going on around him. That is not the characteristic of sati in the
development of insight. Sati of vipassanā is, as we have seen, mindful
of a nāma or a rūpa which appears, without there being a thought of
self who makes a particular effort or who is directing the attention
to an object. Also sati is only a type of nāma, not self.

When there is mindfulness of a nāma or rūpa which appears, direct
understanding of that reality can at that moment be developed. When we
learn a subject such as mathematics or history, we study books and try
to understand the subject we study. In order to understand realities
we have to investigate or ``study'' them, but that is not study
through thinking, it is the development of direct understanding of
realities. When a reality such as sound appears and there is
mindfulness of it, its characteristic can be ``studied'' or
investigated, just for an extremely short moment. In that way it can
be known as it is: a conditioned reality which does not belong to
anyone. The word ``study'' can remind us that there should be
mindfulness of realities again and again, until they are known as they
are. Full understanding cannot be achieved within a short time.

As we have seen in the definition of the @emph{Atthasālinī},
``guarding'' is a manifestation of mindfulness. Through mindfulness
the six doors are guarded. When there is no mindfulness after having
seen visible object through the eyes, there is bound to be attachment,
aversion and ignorance on account of the object. We are absorbed in
the objects which are experienced through the six doors. When
mindfulness arises there is no akusala citta on account of the object
which is experienced and thus the doorways are guarded. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} compares mindfulness with a doorkeeper. 

In order to understand the function of mindfulness it is helpful to
know the danger of the absence of mindfulness. The definition of
``Heedlessness'' in the @emph{Book of Analysis} (Vibhaṅga, Chapter 17,
Analysis of Small Items, par 846) reminds us of the danger of akusala
and the value of mindfulness which guards the six doors. We read:

@quotation

Therein what is ``heedlessness''? Wrong bodily action or wrong verbal
action or wrong mental action or the succumbing and repeated
succumbing of consciousness to the five strands of sense pleasures or
not working carefully, not working constantly, working spasmodically,
being stagnant, relinquishing wish (desire-to-do, chanda),
relinquishing the task, non-pursuance, non-development,
non-repetition, non-resolution, non-practising, heedlessness in the
development of good states; that which is similar, heedlessness, being
heedless, state of being heedless. This is called heedlessness.

@end quotation

When we are not mindful we succumb repeatedly to the ``five strands of
sense pleasures''. The doors of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, bodysense
and the mind-door are not guarded. We are working ``spasmodically'',
or we are stagnant; we are lazy as to the development of right
understanding. We cannot force the arising of mindfulness, but when we
see the danger of akusala it can condition non-forgetfulness of the
reality appearing at the present moment. When mindfulness arises there
is no ``relinquishing of the task'', namely the task of the
development of right understanding.

It may seem uninteresting to investigate realities such as visible
object, seeing, sound or hearing, but we should remember that right
understanding of realities bears directly on our daily life. It can
eliminate wrong bodily action, wrong verbal action and wrong mental
action. When wrong view has been eradicated completely we shall never
again neglect the five precepts since there are no more conditions for
neglecting them. Even when one has not yet become a sotāpanna,
mindfulness can prevent akusala kamma. For instance, when there is an
unpleasant sound aversion may arise and it could motivate akusala
kamma. Whereas when there is mindfulness of sound as only a kind of
rūpa, not the voice of someone, not the sound of a radio, the doors
are guarded. When mindfulness guards the six doors it is to the
benefit of ourselves as well as of other people. 

As we have seen, the @emph{Atthasālinī} states that the proximate
cause of mindfulness is firm remembrance (saññā) or the four
applications of mindfulness (satipaṭṭhāna). There can be mindfulness
of the nāma or rūpa which appears because of firm remembrance of all
we learnt from the teachings about nāma and rūpa. Listening is
mentioned in the scriptures as a most important condition for the
attainment of enlightenment, because when we listen time and again,
there can be firm remembrance of the Dhamma. Mindfulness is different
from remembrance, saññā. Saññā accompanies every citta; it recognizes
the object and ``marks'' it, so that it can be recognized again.
Mindfulness, sati, is not forgetful of what is wholesome. It arises
with sobhana cittas. But when there is sati which is non-forgetful of
dāna, sīla, of the object of calm or, in the case of vipassanā, of the
nāma and rūpa appearing at the present moment, there is also kusala
saññā which remembers the object in the right way, in the wholesome
way. 

The other proximate cause of mindfulness is the four applications of
mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna@footnote{Satipaṭṭhāna means mindfulness of
vipassanā or the object of mindfulness of vipassanā.}. All realities
can be object of mindfulness in the development of insight and are
thus included in the four applications of mindfulness which are rūpa,
feeling, citta and dhamma. For those who have accumulations to develop
calm to the degree of jhāna and to develop insight as well, also
jhānacitta can be object of mindfulness in vipassanā, in order to see
it as non-self. Right understanding of realities is developed through
mindfulness of any nāma or rūpa which appears now, be it akusala
citta, mahā-kusala citta, jhānacitta or any other reality. One should
not try to direct mindfulness to a particular object; there is no self
who can have power over any reality or who can direct sati. There is
not any reality which is excluded from the four applications of
mindfulness.

Mindfulness is one of the ``five spiritual faculties'' (indriyas)
which should be developed. As we have seen, the other spiritual
faculties are: confidence, energy, concentration and wisdom. We read
in the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par 14) about the faculty of mindfulness:

@quotation

What on that occasion is the faculty of mindfulness? 

The mindfulness which on that occasion is recollecting, calling back
to mind; the mindfulness which is remembering, bearing in mind, the
opposite of superficiality and of obliviousness; mindfulness as
faculty (indriya), mindfulness as power (bala), right mindfulness---
this is the faculty of mindfulness that there then is.

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter II, 147), in its
explanation of this passage, states about ``non-superficiality'':

@quotation
@dots{}``non-superficiality'' (in the sense of diving or entering
into the object) is the state of not letting the object float away.
Not as pumpkins and pots, etc., which float on the water and do not
sink therein, does mindfulness sink into the object. Hence it is said
to be non-superficiality@dots{}

@end quotation

Mindfulness is an indriya, a ``controlling faculty'', a ``leader'' of
the citta and accompanying cetasikas in its function of heedfulness,
of non-forgetfulness of what is wholesome. We read in the
@emph{Atthasālinī}, in the same section:

@quotation
@dots{}It exercises government (over associated states) in the
characteristic of presenting or illuminating the object---this is the
faculty of mindfulness.

@end quotation

Mindfulness is non-forgetful of the object, and understanding (paññā)
has the function of knowing it as it is. Mindfulness, when it is
developed, becomes a power or strength (bala), and then it is
unshakable by its opposite, by forgetfulness. We read in the same
section of the @emph{Atthasālinī} : 
@dots{}It does not fluctuate on account of negligence---this is
``strength of mindfulness''. ``Right mindfulness'' is irreversible,
emancipating, moral mindfulness.

@quotation

The five wholesome controlling faculties, the ``spiritual faculties'',
must be developed in samatha in order to attain jhāna and in vipassanā
in order to attain enlightenment. It is our nature to be forgetful of
the reality which appears now, but gradually mindfulness can be
accumulated. It can even become a ``power''. 

@end quotation

Right mindfulness is one of the factors of the eightfold Path. It is
``emancipating''; the factors of the eightfold Path lead to freedom
from defilements. Mindfulness is also one of the enlightenment factors
(bojjhangas). The other factors are: investigation of Dhamma (dhamma
vicaya), energy, enthusiasm (pīti), tranquillity (passaddhi),
concentration and equanimity. 

One may wonder how, in the development of insight, the faculty of
mindfulness, the power of mindfulness, the Path factor right
mindfulness and the enlightenment factor of mindfulness can be
developed. The answer is: through mindfulness of the nāma and rūpa
which appears right now. There is no other way. Sights, sounds,
scents, flavours and tangible objects are most of the time objects of
attachment, aversion and ignorance. If mindfulness arises and right
understanding of the object is being developed, one is at that moment
not enslaved to the object nor disturbed by it. If we understand that
mindfulness of realities can eventually have an immediate effect on
our daily life, we will have more courage to develop it at this
moment.

@subsection Questions
@enumerate

@item
What is the object of mindfulness with dāna?

@item
What is the object of mindfulness with sīla?

@item
What is the object of mindfulness in samatha?

@item
Why can the body as a whole not be the object of mindfulness in the
development of insight?

@item
How does one know when there is mindfulness of the level of samatha
and when mindfulness of the level of insight?

@item
In what way can the ``study'' of realities such as visible object,
seeing, sound or hearing have a wholesome effect on our daily life?

@item
Does the word ``mindfulness'' as we use it in daily life represent
the reality of sati of vipassanā?

@end enumerate

@node Moral Shame and Fear of Blame
@chapter Moral Shame and Fear of Blame
@section Moral Shame (hiri) and Fear of Blame (ottappa)

When we apply ourselves to kusala there is confidence, there is
mindfulness which is non-forgetful of kusala, and there are many other
sobhana cetasikas which each have their own specific function while
they accompany the kusala citta. Moral shame, hiri, and fear of blame,
ottappa, are two other sobhana cetasikas which accompany each sobhana
citta. Moral shame or conscientiousness has shame of akusala and fear
of blame has fear of the consequences of akusala. Each akusala citta
is accompanied by the opposites of moral shame and fear of blame,
namely by shamelessness, ahirika, and by recklessness, anottappa.
Whenever there is kusala citta there have to be moral shame and fear
of blame.

There are many degrees of kusala and thus there are many degrees of
moral shame and fear of blame. The more we see the impurity of akusala
and realize its danger, the more moral shame and fear of blame will be
developed; they will abhor even akusala which is more subtle.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 142) gives the following definition of
hiri, moral shame (here translated as conscience), and ottappa, fear
of blame (here translated as shame):

@quotation

It has conscientious scruples (hiriyati) about bodily misconduct,
etc., thus it is conscience (hiri). This is a term for modesty. It is
ashamed (ottappati) of those same things, thus it is shame (ottappa).
This is a term for anxiety about evil. Herein, conscience has the
characteristic of disgust at evil, while shame (ottappa) has the
characteristic of dread of it. Conscience has the function of not
doing evil and that in the mode of modesty, while shame has the
function of not doing it and that in the mode of dread. They are
manifested as shrinking from evil in the way already stated. Their
proximate causes are self-respect and respect of others
(respectively)@dots{}

@end quotation

The words shame, scruples, fear or anxiety do not, in this case, have
the same meaning as in conventional language. When we think with
aversion or worry about our akusala there are akusala cittas. Moral
shame, hiri, and fear of blame, ottappa, do not arise with a citta
accompanied by aversion and worry; they accompany kusala citta. 

Moral shame and fear of blame always arise together but they are two
different cetasikas with different characteristics. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Part IV, Chapter I, 125-127) gives a similar
definition as the @emph{Visuddhimagga} of moral shame and fear of
blame and illustrates their difference. The @emph{Atthasālinī}
explains that moral shame (hiri) has a subjective origin, that its
proximate cause is respect for oneself. Fear of blame (ottappa) has an
external cause, it is influenced by the ``world''; its proximate cause
is respect for someone else@footnote{See also Chapter 14, where I deal
with their opposites, shamelessness and recklessness.}. 

Moral shame, as the @emph{Atthasālinī} explains, can arise because of
consideration of one's birth, one's age, heroism (courage and
strength) and wide experience. Moral shame arises from consideration
of one's birth when someone of a respectable family does not want to
act as someone who has not had a proper education. Moral shame arises
from consideration of one's age when someone who is an adult does not
want to behave like a child. Moral shame arises from consideration of
heroism when someone does not want to act like a weakling but feels
that he should have courage and strength. Moral shame arises from
consideration of wide experience when one does not want to act like a
fool who has not learnt anything. It may happen that, although we have
listened to the Dhamma and see the value of having less attachment to
self, we are still selfish, disinclined to help others, or still
easily inclined to anger. However, there may also be moments that we
remember that the Dhamma we studied should be applied and that it is
foolish to give in to selfishness and anger. At such moments moral
shame arises because of consideration of what we have learnt, because
of the understanding we have acquired from the study of the Dhamma.

As we have seen, fear of blame, ottappa, fears the consequences of
evil. These consequences are manifold. There are many degrees of
akusala kamma and these produce different degrees of result, vipāka.
Some akusala kammas produce their results in the course of our life by
way of unpleasant experiences through the senses; when we are blamed
by others or receive punishment it is the result of kamma. There is
also akusala kamma which produces result by way of an unhappy rebirth.
When we consider the consequences of akusala we should not only think
of the vipāka it produces, but we should also see the danger of
accumulating more and more tendencies to akusala. Because of
defilements we are unhappy, we have no peace of mind.

Even if one has not studied the Dhamma one can still have moral shame
and fear of blame. One may not know very precisely what akusala is and
what its consequences are, but one can still appreciate the value of
kusala and see some of the disadvantages of akusala. There may be
stinginess or laziness as to kusala, but at the moment the value is
seen of kusala, moral shame and fear of blame which abhor akusala
arise with the kusala citta.

Moral shame and fear of blame are the proximate cause of sīla,
morality. We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (I, 22): 

@quotation
@dots{}For when conscience (hiri) and shame (ottappa) are in
existence, virtue arises and persists; and when they are not, it
neither arises nor persists@dots{}

@end quotation

There are many degrees of sīla and thus it is evident that there are
many degrees of shame and fear of blame as well. When there are no
shame and fear of blame even as to gross defilements, one lives like
an animal. We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (I, Book of the Twos,
Chapter I, par 9) that if moral shame and fear of blame would not
protect the world there would be promiscuity between people, even
between relatives, as exists ``among goats and sheep, fowls and swine,
dogs and jackals''. That is why moral shame and fear of blame are
called the ``guardians of the world''.

There may be moral shame and fear of blame with regard to gross
defilements but not with regard to defilements which are more subtle.
One may not kill or steal, but one may have no shame and fear as
regards gossiping or unkind thoughts. We may often mislead ourselves
as to kusala and akusala. There are countless moments of clinging but
we do not notice them. When the citta is akusala citta there is
ignorance which does not know what is right and what is wrong, and
there is also shamelessness, ahirika, which has no shame of akusala,
and recklessness, anottappa, which does not fear its consequences.
Through the Dhamma we will know more precisely when the citta is
kusala citta and when akusala citta, and thus moral shame and fear of
blame will develop.

Through the development of right understanding we come to see the
danger of all kinds of akusala, be it gross or more subtle. One may
know in theory that wrong view is dangerous, but there may still be
the tendency to take realities for self. When there is still a notion
of self who sees or hears, there is no shame and fear of akusala. When
we consider the difference between the sotāpanna who has eradicated
wrong view and the non-ariyan, it will help us to see the danger of
wrong view. The sotāpanna has no more conditions to commit gross
akusala kamma which can produce an unhappy rebirth whereas the
non-ariyan still has conditions for the committing of gross akusala
kamma. Because of clinging to ``self'' one becomes more and more
enslaved to gain and loss, praise and blame and the other vicissitudes
of life. So long as defilements have not been eradicated we have to
continue to be in the cycle of birth and death. Even if one cannot see
the danger of rebirth one may understand that it is sorrowful that
defilements are bound to arise again and again.

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Fives, Chapter IX,
par 4) about the factors which, if a monk possesses them, hinder the
attainment of the goal of monkhood, and about the factors which lead
to the goal: 

@quotation

Monks, possessed of five qualities, an elder becomes not what he ought
to become@dots{}

He is without faith (saddhā), modesty (hiri), fear of blame (ottappa),
he is lazy and lacks insight@dots{}

Monks, possessed of five qualities an elder becomes what he ought to
become@dots{}

He has faith, modesty, fear of blame, he is diligent and develops
insight@dots{}

@end quotation

This sutta can remind both monks and laypeople that if there is no
development of understanding of the reality appearing at this moment,
people will not become what they ought to become: a person who has
eradicated defilements. If we remember the shortness of life there
will be more often moral shame and fear of blame which abhor laziness
as regards kusala. The Buddha reminded people not to be heedless, but
to be earnest, mindful at this very moment.

To the extent that understanding develops, moral shame and fear of
blame develop as well and they can become powers (balas). As we have
seen, the five sobhana cetasikas which are classified as faculties,
indriyas, are also classified as powers, namely: confidence, energy,
mindfulness, concentration and wisdom. However, in addition to these
five powers also moral shame and fear of blame can be classified as
powers. We read in the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par 30) about the power
of moral shame, hiri, here translated as conscientiousness:

The feeling of conscientious scruple which there is on that occasion
when scruples ought to be felt, conscientious scruple at attaining to
bad and evil states---this is the power of conscientiousness that
there then is.

We read (in par 31) about the power of fear of blame: 

@quotation

The sense of guilt which there is on that occasion, where a sense of
guilt ought to be felt, a sense of guilt at attaining to bad and evil
states---that is the fear of blame that there then is.

@end quotation

A power is unshakable by its opposite. The powers of moral shame and
fear of blame cannot be shaken by their opposites shamelessness
(ahirika) and recklessness (anottappa), which arise with each akusala
citta. 

The sotāpanna has moral shame and fear of blame which are unshakable
by their opposites with regard to akusala kamma which can produce an
unhappy rebirth. However, although he is on the way to eventually
reach the state of perfection, he has not eradicated all defilements.
He still clings to pleasant objects, he still has aversion. At the
subsequent stages of enlightenment moral shame and fear of blame
become more refined and at the moment of the attainment of arahatship
they have reached perfection.

We will not understand the functions of moral shame and fear of blame
merely by reading general definitions of them, but we have to consider
the difference between kusala citta and akusala citta when they arise
in our daily life. Then we will notice that, for example, the citta
with avarice is completely different from the citta with generosity.
When there is true generosity moral shame and fear of blame perform
their functions. However, in between the moments of generosity there
are bound to be moments of clinging and we may not notice these. We
may be attached to the object we give or we may expect the receiver to
be kind to us. Also such moments can be known. We should be grateful
to the Buddha who taught us to develop right understanding so that the
present moment can be known as it really is. Through right
understanding we will have more confidence in kusala and we will see
the dangers and disadvantages of akusala. Thus moral shame and fear of
blame will develop.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
Why will moral shame and fear of blame develop to the extent that
wisdom develops?

@item
Why can moral shame and fear of blame be classified as powers?

@item
What is the difference between moral shame and fear of blame of the
sotāpanna and those of the non-ariyan?

@end enumerate

@node Non-Attachment 
@chapter Non-Attachment 
@section Non-Attachment (alobha)

Non-attachment, alobha, is one of the three sobhana hetus, beautiful
roots. A root (hetu or mūla) gives a firm support to the citta and
cetasikas it arises together with. All sobhana cittas are rooted in
non-attachment, alobha, and non-aversion, adosa, and they may or may
not be rooted in wisdom, paññā. Thus, non-attachment has to accompany
each sobhana citta. 

We have many more moments with attachment than with non-attachment and
we are so used to live with attachment that we hardly realize that it
is akusala. A person who is leading the life of a layman takes it for
granted to be attached to people and possessions. We may think that
such kinds of attachment are not dangerous, provided we do not harm
others, but all kinds of akusala lead to sorrow. There is attachment
time and again and thus we accumulate it evermore. When we stand up,
move around, reach for things, eat or go to sleep, we @emph{want} most
of the time something for ourselves and then there are cittas rooted
in attachment. We are almost all the time thinking of ourselves, we
try to acquire pleasant things for ourselves and we expect other
people to be agreeable to us. Even when we think that we apply
ourselves to kusala, for example, when we listen to the Dhamma or
speak about the Dhamma, there are likely to be many moments of
attachment arising after the kusala cittas. We may be attached to
``our kusala'', we tend to like the idea of ourselves being good and
wise, we find ourselves important.

If we come to know more precisely the citta arising at the present
moment we will be able to notice that the moments of clinging are
entirely different from the moments of unselfishness or detachment.
There is non-attachment with each kusala citta, but it does not last.
There are many more akusala cittas in our life than kusala cittas.

Non-attachment, alobha, has many shades and degrees. It can be
described as unselfishness, liberality or generosity. There is alobha
when there are thoughts of sacrifice and sharing, when there is
renunciation and dispassion@footnote{See The Roots of Good and Evil,
p. 19, by Ven. Nyanaponika, The Wheel no. 251-253, B.P.S. Kandy.}. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 127) gives the
following definition of alobha:

@quotation
@dots{}absence of greed (alobha) has the characteristic of the mind
being free from cupidity for an object of thought, or of its being
detached, like a drop of water on a lotus leaf. It has the function of
not appropriating, like an emancipated monk, and the manifestation of
detachment, like a man fallen into a foul place@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 143) gives a similar
definition@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi, par32.}. 

When there is a moment of non-attachment there cannot be attachment at
the same time. Non-attachment has the characteristic of non-adherence
like a water drop on a lotus leaf. The lotus grows in the water but it
is not wetted by the water, that is its nature. A drop of water glides
off a lotus leaf without affecting it. So it is with non-attachment,
alobha. It is not attached to the object which is experienced, it is
unaffected by it. That is the nature of non-attachment. Sometimes
there are conditions for non-attachment, but shortly afterwards we are
affected again by objects. Through right understanding one will become
less affected. We read in the @emph{Sutta Nipāta} (Khuddaka Nikāya,
The Group of Discourses, vs. 811-813,)@footnote{I am using the P.T.S.
translation by K.R. Norman.} :

@quotation
@dots{}Not being dependent upon anything, a sage holds nothing as
being pleasant or unpleasant. Lamentation and avarice do not cling to
him, as water does not cling to a (lotus-)leaf. 

Just as a drop of water does not cling to a (lotus-)leaf, as water
does not cling to a lotus, so a sage does not cling to what is seen or
heard or thought.

Therefore a purified one does not think that purity is by means of
what is seen, heard, or thought, nor does he wish for purity by
anything else@footnote{By any other way than the Noble Eightfold Path,
according to the commentary. See the Discourse Collection, Wheel
Publication no. 82, B.P.S. Kandy.}. He is neither impassioned nor
dispassioned.

@end quotation

The function of non-attachment is, as we have seen, ``not
appropriating, like an emancipated monk''. A monk who has attained
arahatship does not hold on to any object which presents itself; he is
not enslaved but completely detached and thus free, emancipated.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} states that non-attachment has the
manifestation of detachment like someone who has fallen into a foul
place. Someone who falls into a cesspool does not consider that a
place of shelter where he could stay. He sees it as a danger, as
something to be abhorred, and therefore he would get out of it as soon
as possible. It is the same with non-attachment, it does not take
refuge in what is actually a danger. Attachment to the objects which
are experienced is dangerous, because attachment leads to all kinds of
evil deeds which can produce an unhappy rebirth. Any form of
attachment, even if it is more subtle, is dangerous, because so long
as attachment has not been eradicated we are subject to rebirth and
thus also to old age, sickness and death.

It is difficult to know the characteristic of non-attachment, since
the moments of non-attachment are rare. We are often too lazy to do
something for someone else; we are attached to our own comfort or to
quiet. Or we may find some excuses: the weather is too cold or too hot
to exert ourselves for someone else. However, when there are
conditions for non-attachment, we do not care about tiredness or
discomfort, we do not think of ourselves but we see the usefulness of
helping someone else. We can learn from experience that non-attachment
is beneficial both for ourselves and for others. At the moment of
non-attachment we renounce our own pleasure and then there is peace of
mind. It may seem that at a particular moment a choice between kusala
and akusala can be made, but there is no self who makes a choice; each
moment of citta is conditioned by many factors. It is not self but the
cetasika alobha which performs the function of detachment. We cannot
force ourselves to renounce sense-pleasures, but we can learn the
difference between the characteristic of kusala and of akusala when
they appear. Thus we will gradually see that kusala is beneficial and
that akusala is not beneficial but harmful.

Whenever kusala citta arises there is non-attachment accompanying the
kusala citta. Non-attachment can arise in the sense-door processes of
citta as well as in the mind-door process. In each of these processes
there are javana-cittas (translated as ``impulsion''), which are, in
the case of non-arahats, kusala cittas or akusala cittas. When kusala
citta arises there is ``wise attention'' to the object which is
experienced, there are no attachment, aversion and ignorance.
Non-attachment which accompanies the kusala citta may, for example,
arise in the eye-door process of cittas which experience visible
object. We usually cling to visible object but when there are
conditions for kusala citta there is non-attachment to the object. 

When we perform a good deed, there is non-attachment already, we do
not have to try to be detached or to renounce something. When we
perform dāna we give up our selfish inclination and we think of the
benefit of someone else, at least for that moment. When we refrain
from harsh speech we give up something, we renounce evil speech by
which we harm both ourselves and others. When there is loving
kindness, which is the cetasika non-aversion, adosa, there must be
non-attachment as well which renounces selfishness. When there is
selfish affection for other people there cannot be loving kindness at
the same time. When we are attached to someone, our attachment does
not do him any good, we only cling to our own pleasant feeling we
derive from his or her company. It is essential to know our own
different feelings. We should find out when pleasant feeling goes
together with selfishness and when it is the joy which may accompany
kusala citta. We are so attached to just having pleasant feeling that
we do not notice when it is akusala and thus useless. At the moment
loving kindness or compassion arises there is genuine concern for
someone else and we forget for a few moments the ``I'' we often
consider the centre of the world.

There are many degrees of non-attachment. Right understanding is the
condition for higher degrees of non-attachment. If there is right
understanding which knows when there is akusala citta and when kusala
citta, there can be the development of calm. Calm can be developed
with meditation subjects such as loving kindness, the contemplation of
the Buddha's virtues, the foulness of the body or other subjects. The
citta with calm is accompanied by non-attachment. When calm has been
developed to the degree of jhāna, defilements are temporarily subdued
but they are not eradicated. Attachment to one's attainment of jhāna
may arise. Only the development of insight can eventually lead to
complete detachment from all objects.

The direct understanding of nāma and rūpa will lead to detachment from
them. So long as there is still the wrong view of self, attachment
cannot be eradicated. We are attached to persons, to ``self'', and we
may not be ready to accept the truth that in the ultimate sense no
``people'' exist. If right understanding of realities is developed we
will know that what we take for people are only citta, cetasika and
rūpa which do not last. 

In the beginning it is difficult to persevere being mindful of seeing,
visible object and the other realities, because we do not notice an
immediate result and we sometimes doubt whether it is really useful.
Is helping someone else not more useful than being aware of visible
object which appears now? All degrees of kusala are useful and we
should not neglect any one of them. If we help someone else or listen
to him with loving kindness and compassion, there are moments of
giving up our selfishness. But shortly after the kusala cittas have
fallen away there tend to be akusala cittas with clinging to ``our
kusala'' or with attachment to people. Also while we help others there
can be mindfulness of realities such as seeing or visible object. In
this way we will become truly convinced that what is seen is not a
person, only a reality which can be experienced through the eyes.
There is already a degree of detachment, although it is still weak,
when there is mindfulness of visible object and understanding of it as
``only a reality'', not a person. In the beginning understanding is
weak, but we should have confidence that it can be developed through
mindfulness of whatever reality appears through one of the six doors.
Thus clinging to ``self'' or to beings can decrease.

The sotāpanna has eradicated all clinging to the concept of self, but
he still clings to sensuous objects. The sakadāgāmī has less clinging
to sensuous objects but he still has not eradicated it. The anāgāmī
has eradicated clinging to sensuous objects but he still clings to
rebirth and he still has cittas rooted in attachment which are
accompanied by conceit. The arahat has eradicated all forms of
clinging and this shows how hard it is to eradicate it. We may think
that we cannot be happy without attachment, but complete detachment
means the highest happiness, it is freedom from all sorrow. 

We may have read in the scriptures that clinging is the root of
sorrow, but we tend to forget this. We read, for example, in the
@emph{Middle Length Sayings} (II, no. 87, Discourse on ``Born of
Affection'') that the Buddha explained to a householder who had lost
his only son, that ``grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair
are born of affection, originate in affection''. However, the
householder did not accept this truth. We read that King Pasenadi
spoke about this subject with Queen Mallikā. When the Queen said that
she agreed with the Buddha's words, the King was displeased. Further
on we read that the Queen tried to explain the truth of the Buddha's
words to the King with examples from his daily life. She said :

@quotation
@dots{}``What do you think about this, sire? Is your daughter Vajīrī
dear to you?''

``Yes, Mallikā. My daughter Vajīrī is dear to me.''

``What do you think about this, sire? From an alteration and otherness
in your daughter Vajīrī would there arise in you grief, sorrow,
suffering, lamentation and despair?'' 

``From an alteration and otherness, Mallikā, in my daughter Vajīrī
there would be a change for me, even for life. How should there not
arise in me grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair?''

``It was in reference to this, sire, that it was said by the Lord, who
knows, who sees, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One: 'Grief,
sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair are born of affection,
originate in affection.' @dots{}''

The Queen then asked the same question with regard to the noble lady
Vāsabhā, the King's consort, General Viḍūḍabha, the son of the
King and Vāsabhā, and the peoples of Kāsi and Kosala. The King then
understood the truth of the Buddha's words and he thereupon paid
respect to the Buddha and uttered words of praise. 

@end quotation

We often forget the truth that suffering is rooted in desire. There is
most of the time clinging after seeing, hearing or the other
experiences through the senses. We have to read and reread the
scriptures many times and consider the Buddha's words. His teaching
is like food for our mind. If we realize that clinging is the root of
all sorrow and suffering we will develop right understanding at this
moment so that, eventually, there will be detachment from all objects

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
Are all kinds of kusala helpful in order to be less selfish?

@item
Why can calm when it is developed in samatha not eradicate clinging?

@item
Why is the development of insight the only way to become detached from
all objects?

@item
Why has only the arahat eradicated clinging completely?

@end enumerate

@node Non-Aversion
@chapter Non-Aversion

@section Non-Aversion (adosa)
Non-aversion or non-hate, is one of the three sobhana hetus, beautiful
roots. As we have seen, each sobhana citta is rooted in non-attachment
and non-aversion, and it may or may not be rooted in wisdom. We may
notice it when we have aversion, dosa, but we may not know the
characteristic of non-aversion, adosa. We dislike having aversion
because it is always accompanied by unpleasant feeling. When the
aversion is gone we may think that there is non-aversion but is that
so? At this moment there may not be aversion but can we be sure that
there is non-aversion which accompanies kusala citta? There may be
attachment to visible object and then there cannot be non-aversion at
the same time. Whenever there is non-aversion there has to be
non-attachment, alobha, as well and several other sobhana cetasikas
which each perform their own function while they assist the kusala
citta.

Adosa can be translated as non-aversion or non-hate, but there are
many forms and degrees of it. Loving kindness, mettā, is a form of
adosa which is directed towards living beings. Adosa can also be
non-aversion with regard to an object which is not a being and then it
can be described as patience. There can be non-aversion or patience
with regard to heat, cold, bodily pain or other unpleasant objects.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 127) defines
non-aversion, adosa, as follows:

@quotation
@dots{}Absence of hate has the characteristic of freedom from
churlishness or resentment, like an agreeable friend; the function of
destroying vexation, or dispelling distress, like sandalwood; the
manifestation of being pleasing, like the full moon@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 143) gives a similar
definition@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi par33.}. Non-aversion has
the characteristic of freedom from savagery or violence, it is gentle
like a good friend. We may see the difference between aversion and
non-aversion when they appear in our daily life. We may be very
annoyed about someone or something, but when we see the disadvantage
of aversion there are conditions for patience. At that moment all the
harshness which characterizes aversion has gone and there is
gentleness instead. There is no self who is patient and gentle, but it
is the cetasika non-aversion, adosa. 

The function of non-aversion is the removing of annoyance or vexation
and non-aversion is compared to sandalwood which has a very agreeable
odour and is said to cure fever. When there is aversion we are vexed
and annoyed; we burn with the fever of hate and we may become
uncontrolled, we may not know what we are doing. Aversion is like a
fire, it is hard to extinguish. However, when non-aversion arises we
are cured of the fever of aversion, all annoyance has gone.

Both aversion and non-aversion influence our bodily disposition. We
read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 129):

@quotation
@dots{}Absence of hate is the cause of youthfulness, for the man of
no hate, not being burnt by the fire of hate, which brings wrinkles
and grey hairs, remains young for a long time@dots{}

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} states that the manifestation of non-aversion
is agreeableness like the full moon. Non-aversion is agreeable both
for oneself and for others, it conduces to harmonious living among
people. Through aversion or hate a person loses his friends, and
through non-aversion he acquires friends. We read in the same section
of the @emph{Atthasālinī} (129): 

@quotation
@dots{}Absence of hate is the cause of the production of friends,
for through love friends are obtained, not lost@dots{}

@end quotation

Non-aversion accompanies each kusala citta, it performs its function
of destroying vexation while we apply ourselves to dāna, observe sīla,
develop calm or insight. Dāna is an act of kindness. When we are
giving a gift with kusala citta we show kindness. When there is
non-aversion there must also be non-attachment which performs its
function of detachment from the object.

When we observe sīla there is non-aversion accompanying the kusala
citta. When we abstain from akusala kamma which harms both ourselves
and others we show an act of kindness. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (in the
same section) states:

@quotation

Good-will is that which does not ruin one's own or another's bodily or
mental happiness, worldly or future advantage and good report.

@end quotation

The Buddha reminded the monks to show acts of kindness to one another,
both privately and in public and this is to be applied by laypeople as
well. When there is true kindness it appears in our manners and
speech. When someone else speaks harshly to us it is difficult not to
have aversion and retort his speech with angry words. We are attached
to pleasant objects and when there is an unpleasant object our
attachment conditions aversion. When we see the ugliness of aversion
and its disadvantages there are conditions to refrain from harsh
speech. When we have aversion on account of what other people are
doing or saying we forget to be mindful of our own cittas. When there
is mindfulness it prevents us from wrong speech and then there is also
non-aversion which removes vexation. 

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (I, Sagāthā-vagga, Chapter XI,
Sakka Suttas, I, par 4) that Sakka, ruler of the gods, was reviled by
Vepacitti, an Asura (a demon). Sakka explained to Mātali, the
charioteer, that it was not because of weakness that he showed
forbearance. He praised patience and forbearance and he said:

@example
@dots{}Worse of the two is he who, when reviled,
Reviles again. Who does not, when reviled,
Revile again, a twofold victory wins.
Both of the other and himself he seeks
The good; for the other's angry mood
Does understand and grows calm and still.
He who of both is a physician, since
Himself he heals and the other too,
Folk deem him fool, they knowing not the Dhamma@dots{}

@end example

There are many opportunities for being impatient with people. We may
be irritated about someone's faults and mistakes, about his way of
speech or his appearance. We may be irritated because someone moves
slowly and is in our way when we are in a hurry. Most of the time we
are concerned about ourselves but not about someone else. When we
find ourselves important aversion can arise very easily and then there
is no kindness. Selfishness and lack of consideration for others
stands in the way of kindness. When there are conditions for kindness
and patience there is peace of mind and then we can see the difference
between kindness and the harsh moments of aversion.

Kindness, mettā, is a form of adosa which is directed towards living
beings. Patience, as we have seen, is another aspect of adosa. There
can be patience with regard to beings and also with regard to objects
which are not beings, thus with regard to all objects which can be
experienced through the six doors. When there is aversion towards
unpleasant objects there is no patience. When we have to endure
hardship it may be difficult not to have aversion, but when
non-aversion arises we can endure what is unpleasant. The Buddha
exhorted the monks to endure unpleasant objects. We read in the
@emph{Middle Length Sayings} (I, no. 2, Discourse on All the Cankers)
that the Buddha spoke about different ways of getting rid of the
cankers and he explained that one of these ways is endurance. It is to
be understood that the cankers cannot be eradicated unless right
understanding is developed. We read:

And what, monks, are the cankers to be got rid of by endurance? In
this teaching, monks, a monk, wisely reflective, is one who bears
cold, heat, hunger, thirst, the touch of gadfly, mosquito, wind and
sun, creeping things, ways of speech that are irksome, unwelcome; he
is of a character to bear bodily feelings which, arising, are painful,
acute, sharp, shooting, disagreeable, miserable, deadly. Whereas,
monks, if he lacked endurance, the cankers which are destructive and
consuming might arise. But because he endures, therefore these cankers
which are destructive and consuming are not. These, monks, are called
the cankers to be got rid of by endurance.

When we feel sick or when we experience another unpleasant object
through one of the senses we may feel sorry for ourselves and complain
about it. We give in to aversion and we are apt to put off the
development of kusala until we are in more favourable conditions. Then
we overlook the opportunity for the development of kusala which is
right at hand: when there are unpleasant objects there is an
opportunity to cultivate patience. We all are bound to suffer from
hunger and thirst, heat and cold; these things occur in our daily life
time and again. The experience of an unpleasant object through one of
the senses is vipāka, the result of kamma, and we cannot avoid vipāka.
After the moments of vipāka have fallen away, there are kusala cittas
or akusala cittas, depending on whether there is ``wise attention'' or
``unwise attention'' to the object. If we see the benefit of patience
in all circumstances there are conditions for non-aversion instead of
aversion.

One of the hardest things to endure is the separation from those who
are dear to us. We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (IV, Book of the
Sevens, Chapter V, par 10) about Nanda's mother, an anāgāmī, who had
through the development of right understanding eradicated aversion.
After she had offered dāna to the monks with Sāriputta and Moggallāna
at their head she testified to Sāriputta about marvellous things which
had happened to her. We read:

@quotation

``@dots{}Rajahs, for some reason, took by force and slew my only
son, Nanda, who was dear and precious to me; yet when the boy was
seized or being seized, bound or being bound, slain or being slain, I
knew no disquietness of heart.''

``It is marvellous and wonderful, O mother of Nanda, that you should
have so purged the surges of the heart.''

``Nor is that all, reverend sir@dots{}When my husband died, he rose
among the yakkas@footnote{Non-human being.} ; and he revealed himself
to me in his old form; but I knew no disquietness of heart on that
account.''

@end quotation

Nanda's mother then spoke about her purity of sīla, her attainment of
the different stages of jhāna, and she declared that she had
eradicated the ``five lower fetters''. These fetters are eradicated at
the attainment of the state of anāgāmī. 

The anāgāmī or ``non-returner'', who has attained the third stage of
enlightenment, has no more attachment to sensuous objects and thus,
when there is an unpleasant object instead of a pleasant object, he
has no conditions for aversion. Nanda's mother who was an anāgāmī,
had no sadness, fear or anxiety, no matter what happened to her. If we
understand that attachment to people can lead to utter distress when
we lose them, we may see the danger of attachment, and then we can be
reminded to develop right understanding which leads to the eradication
of all defilements. 

In the development of right understanding patience has to be applied.
When there are many moments of akusala citta we should have patience
to be mindful even of akusala citta. When there is aversion we may be
annoyed about it, or we may take it for ``my aversion''. When there is
mindfulness of aversion it can be known as only a type of nāma which
has arisen because of its appropriate conditions. At the moment of
mindfulness there is non-aversion, adosa, instead of aversion, dosa. 

Loving kindness, mettā, is, as we have seen, a form of adosa which is
in particular directed towards living beings. The @emph{Visuddhimagga}
(Chapter IX, 93) gives, apart from the definition of non-aversion, a
definition of loving kindness or mettā:

As to characteristic, etc. , loving kindness is characterized here as
promoting the aspect of welfare. Its function is to prefer welfare. It
is manifested as the removal of annoyance. Its proximate cause is
seeing lovableness in beings. It succeeds when it makes ill-will
subside, and it fails when it produces (selfish) affection.

Loving kindness can arise with right understanding or without it.
Someone may be kind to others because he has accumulated kindness, but
there may not be right understanding. If there is right understanding
of the characteristic of loving kindness it can be developed. It can
be developed as a subject of samatha, but one cannot succeed if one
does not practise it in daily life.

The ``near enemy'' of loving kindness is selfish affection,
attachment. Attachment tends to arise very closely after moments of
loving kindness but we may not notice this. We should find out whether
we want to be kind only to people we particularly like, or whether we
are kind to whomever we meet, because we are truly concerned for his
welfare. From our own experience we can learn to see the difference
between loving kindness and selfish affection. If we are attached to
someone we will miss him when he is no longer with us; attachment
conditions aversion. When there is loving kindness we do not think of
our own enjoyment in someone's company. When loving kindness arises,
there is detachment, alobha, and also equanimity or impartiality
(tatramajjhattatā). 

When we are giving a gift to someone or when we are helping someone,
there may be pleasant feeling. However, instead of pure loving
kindness there can be attachment. We should remember that pleasant
feeling can arise with kusala citta as well as with citta rooted in
attachment. We find pleasant feeling very important and we tend to
think that it is kusala all the time, but we can easily be misled by
pleasant feeling.

When loving kindness arises there is not necessarily pleasant feeling
all the time. Kusala citta can be accompanied by pleasant feeling or
by indifferent feeling.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (Chapter IX) gives advice for the application
of loving kindness for someone who is inclined to give in to anger. He
should review the danger in hate and the advantage of patience. A
person harms himself when he is angry. When he is angry with someone
he should not pay attention to the bad qualities of that person but
only to his good qualities, and if he has none he should be
compassionate instead of angry. That person's accumulation of akusala
will bring him sorrow. We should remember that we all are ``heirs'' of
our deeds, we will receive the results of our deeds.

We could also regard the person we are angry with as five khandhas
(aggregates) or as elements which are impermanent. These arise and
then fall away immediately and thus what is then the object we are
angry with? The citta of the other person which motivated unpleasant
speech or an unpleasant deed has fallen away already and thus it
belongs to the past. Another way of overcoming anger is giving a gift.
We can learn from experience that, when we give a gift, there are
conditions for kusala citta both for the giver and the receiver.
Giving and receiving mellows the heart and thus the relationship
between people can be improved.

We could also, in order to have less anger and more loving kindness,
reflect on the virtues the Bodhisatta accumulated. We read in the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (IX, 26) about the way of reviewing these:

@quotation
@dots{}is it not the fact that when your Master was a Bodhisatta
before discovering full enlightenment, while he was still engaged in
fulfilling the Perfections during the four incalculable ages and a
hundred thousand aeons, he did not allow hate to corrupt his mind even
when his enemies tried to murder him on various occasions? For
example, in the Sīlavant Birth Story (Jātakas I, 261) when his friends
rose to prevent his kingdom of three hundred leagues being seized by
an enemy king who had been incited by a wicked minister in whose mind
his own queen had sown hate for him, he did not allow them to lift a
weapon. Again when he was buried, along with a thousand companions, up
to the neck in a hole dug in the earth in a charnel ground, he had no
thought of hate. And when, after saving his life by a heroic effort
helped by jackals scrapping away soil when they had come to devour the
corpses, he went with the aid of a spirit to his own bedroom and saw
his enemy lying on his own bed, he was not angry but treated him as a
friend, undertaking mutual pledge, and he then exclaimed:

@end quotation

@example

``The brave aspire, the wise will not lose heart;
I see myself as I had wished to be.'' (Jātakas I, 267)

@end example

However, only reflecting on loving-kindness is not enough, it should
be practised. For example, when others talk to us we can listen to
them with loving kindness. When there is more right understanding of
realities there are more conditions for loving kindness in our
relationship with others. When we cling to a concept of ``people'' we
tend to be attached to an idea of having friends. We feel lonely when
we are without friends. In the ultimate sense there are no friends
who exist, there are only citta, cetasika and rūpa, and these arise
and then fall away immediately. Actually, friendship or loving
kindness can arise with the citta which thinks of a being. Loving
kindness can be extended to whosoever is in our company and then there
is a moment of true friendship. At such a moment there is no thought
of self who wants friendship from others, no feeling of loneliness or
worry about the attitude of others towards us. If we consider more the
reality of loving kindness instead of clinging to an idea of
friendship there are more conditions for unselfish love.

Loving kindness is one of the meditation subjects of samatha. Those
who have accumulated conditions for the development of calm to the
degree of jhāna can attain jhāna with this meditation
subject@footnote{With this subject different stages of rūpa-jhāna can
be attained, but not the highest stage, since the jhānacittas of the
highest stage (the fourth in the fourfold system and the fifth in the
fivefold system) are accompanied by indifferent feeling. Loving
kindness can be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent
feeling and thus it is not the object of the jhānacittas of the
highest stage of jhāna.}. Loving kindness (mettā) is among the four
meditation subjects which are called the ``divine abidings''
(brahma-vihāras). The other three ``divine abidings'' are: compassion
(karuṇā), sympathetic joy (muditā) and equanimity (upekkhā). They are
called divine abidings because they are excellent and of a ``faultless
nature'': those who cultivate them live like the ``Brahmā divinities''
(@emph{Atthasālinī}, I, Book I, Part V, Chapter XII, 195). The divine
abidings are also called ``Illimitables'' (appamaññās) because they
arise in an immeasurable field, their field or object is beings
without limits. Loving kindness, for example, can, when jhāna is
attained with this subject, be extended to all beings, none excepted. 

Loving kindness is sublime and it can be illimitable, but even the
most excellent qualities are impermanent and dukkha. Without the
development of right understanding good deeds, excellent virtues or
even jhāna cannot lead to the end of defilements. The final goal of
the Buddha's teachings is the eradication of defilements and this
means the end of dukkha.

Through the development of right understanding the clinging to the
self can gradually decrease, and as a consequence there will be more
conditions for loving kindness and patience. One will be more inclined
to help others without selfish motives. There are many degrees of
non-aversion, adosa, and in the arahat non-aversion has reached
perfection. Those who have attained enlightenment, the ariyans, do not
have wrong view of people who exist; they have realized that there are
only nāma and rūpa, but they can still think of the concept ``being''.
The arahat can think of ``being'' but he thinks of beings without any
defilements. Those who have eradicated defilements are truly kind to
all beings.

@subsection Questions
@enumerate
@item
Why must there be right understanding of the characteristic of loving
kindness in order to develop it as a subject of calm?

@item
Why is the ``near enemy'' of loving kindness attachment?

@item
Can there be kindness with indifferent feeling?

@item
Can there be non-aversion, adosa, towards an object which is not a
being?
@end enumerate

@node Equanimity 
@chapter Equanimity 
@section Equanimity (tatramajjhattatā)
@example
The good give up (attachment for) everything; the saintly prattle not
with thoughts of craving: whether affected by happiness or by pain,
the wise show neither elation nor depression.

    Dhammapada (Chapter VI, The Wise, vs. 83)

@end example

We are still susceptible to elation and depression. Those who have
highly developed wisdom, the arahats, are not susceptible to elation
nor depression, they have equanimity instead. There are many kinds and
degrees of this quality and the arahat has the highest degree.

Equanimity, evenmindedness or balance of mind (in Pāli:
tatramajjhattatā), is one of the nineteen sobhana cetasikas which
accompany each sobhana citta. It is not easy to know the
characteristic of equanimity. We may think that there is equanimity
whenever there is neither like nor dislike of what we see, hear or
experience through the other senses, but at such moments there may be
ignorance instead of equanimity. We may confuse equanimity and
indifferent feeling, but these are different cetasikas; equanimity is
not feeling, the cetasika which is vedanā. The @emph{Visuddhimagga}
(XIV, 153) states about equanimity:

It has the characteristic of conveying citta and cetasikas evenly. Its
function is to prevent deficiency and excess, or its function is to
inhibit partiality. It is manifested as neutrality. It should be
regarded as like a conductor (driver) who looks on with equanimity on
thoroughbreds progressing evenly.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 133) gives a
similar definition. When there is equanimity there is neither elation
nor depression. The object which is experienced is viewed with
impartiality and neutrality, just as a charioteer treats with
impartiality his well-trained horses. Equanimity effects the balance
of the citta and the other cetasikas it arises together with. There is
no balance of mind when akusala citta arises, when we are cross,
greedy, avaricious or ignorant. Whereas when we are generous, observe
morality (sīla), develop calm or develop right understanding of nāma
and rūpa, there is balance of mind.

There are different forms and degrees of equanimity. If we know more
about them it will help us to understand the characteristic of
equanimity. The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV, 156-172) deals with
different kinds of equanimity@footnote{The Visuddhimagga uses in this
section the term ``upekkhā'' for equanimity, instead of
tatramajjhattatā. Upekkhā can stand for indifferent feeling as well as
for equanimity, depending on the context. See also the Atthasālinī,
Book I, Part IV, Chapter III, 172, for the different types of
equanimity.}. 

One of the aspects of equanimity mentioned by the @emph{Visuddhimagga}
is @emph{equanimity as specific neutrality}. As we have read in the
definition of equanimity given by the @emph{Visuddhimagga}, it has the
characteristic of conveying (carrying on) evenly citta and the
accompanying cetasikas, and its function is the preventing of
deficiency and excess, or the inhibiting of partiality. Equanimity
effects the balance of the citta and the cetasikas it arises together
with, so that there is neither deficiency nor excess of any one among
them. When the citta is kusala citta it is always accompanied by
equanimity which effects the balance of the citta and the accompanying
cetasikas. Kusala citta is also accompanied, for example, by energy or
effort, viriya, which is balanced: there is neither deficiency nor
excess of it, and thus it can assist the kusala citta in accomplishing
its task. All cetasikas play their own part in assisting the kusala
citta and equanimity has its own specific function in effecting mental
balance.

When we abstain from wrong action or wrong speech there is equanimity
with the kusala citta. When others, for example, treat us badly or use
abusive speech, there can be equanimity, and then there is no
impatience, intolerance or anxiety about our own well-being. With
evenmindedness one can abstain from answering back harshly or from
acts of vengeance. Equanimity is one of the ``perfections'' the
Bodhisatta developed together with right understanding for innumerable
lives. When there is mindfulness of nāma and rūpa appearing now there
is patience and equanimity, even if the object which is experienced is
unpleasant.

There are several other kinds of equanimity. There is equanimity in
samatha and equanimity in vipassanā. When calm is developed or when
there is right understanding of the present moment there is equanimity
which performs its function. The @emph{Visuddhimagga} mentions some
aspects of equanimity which are equanimity of samatha and some which
are equanimity of vipassanā. 

One of the aspects of equanimity mentioned by the @emph{Visuddhimagga}
is equanimity as one of the ``divine abidings'' (brahmavihāra-upekkhā)
and this is developed in samatha (Vis. IV, 158). As we have seen,
there are four ``divine abidings'' which are objects of calm: loving
kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity. 

When loving kindness is developed one wishes that other beings may be
happy. When compassion is developed one wishes beings to be free from
suffering. When sympathetic joy is developed one wishes beings'
success. When equanimity is developed one does not think of promoting
other beings' happiness, alleviating their misery or wishing their
success, but one views them with impartiality. 

We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IX, 96) about the divine abiding
of equanimity:

@quotation

Equanimity is characterized as promoting the aspect of neutrality
towards beings. Its function is to see equality in beings. It is
manifested as the quieting of resentment and approval. Its proximate
cause is seeing ownership of deeds (kamma) thus: ``Beings are owners
of their deeds. Whose (if not theirs) is the choice by which they will
become happy, or will get free from suffering, or will not fall away
from the success they have reached?'' It succeeds when it makes
resentment and approval subside, and it fails when it produces the
equanimity of unknowing, which is that (worldly-minded indifference of
ignorance) based on the home-life.

@end quotation

Ignorance is called the ``near enemy'' of equanimity, because one may
think that there is equanimity when there is actually ignorance. Its
far enemies are greed and resentment. When there is attachment or
aversion there cannot be equanimity at the same time.

If one understands the characteristic of equanimity it can be
developed in daily life and condition moments of calm. Sometimes
people may be beyond any help, but when we remember that unpleasant
results in life they receive are conditioned by kamma, that people are
``heirs'' to kamma, it will prevent us from being distressed. Sadness
about other people's suffering is not helpful, neither for ourselves
nor for others, whereas when there is equanimity we can be of comfort
to others. Those who have accumulated conditions for the development
of calm to the degree of jhāna can, with the divine abiding of
equanimity as meditation subject, attain jhāna@footnote{With this
meditation subject the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna can be attained,
but not the lower stages. If someone wants to attain jhāna with this
subject he should first develop the divine abidings of loving
kindness, compassion and sympathetic joy, by means of which the first,
second and third stage of jhāna of the fourfold system ( and the
fourth stage of the fivefold system) can be attained, but not the
highest stage. If he then develops the divine abiding of equanimity he
can attain the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna (Vis. IX, 88, 111, 118).}.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} mentions other aspects of equanimity, which
pertain to samatha, namely the specific quality of equanimity in the
third stage of rūpa-jhāna (of the fourfold system and the fourth stage
of the fivefold system@footnote{See Chapter 8 for the fourfold system
and the fivefold system of jhāna.}), which is called @emph{equanimity
of jhāna} (jhāna-upekkhā)@footnote{See Vis. IV, 177. In this stage of
jhāna the grosser jhāna-factors of applied thinking (vitakka),
sustained thinking (vicāra) and rapture (pīti) have been abandoned
(see Chapter 8 and 11). There is still pleasant feeling (sukha), but
no attachment to it; there is equanimity even towards the highest
bliss.}, and equanimity in the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna, which is
called @emph{purifying equanimity}@footnote{In this stage also the
jhāna-factor of happy feeling has been abandoned; there is indifferent
feeling and ``purity of mindfulness due to equanimity'' (Book of
Analysis, Chapter 12, Analysis of Jhāna, par597, and Vis. IV, 194).}.
At each subsequent stage of jhāna the jhānacitta and its accompanying
cetasikas are calmer, purer and more refined. 

Each of the aspects of equanimity mentioned by the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} is different. Equanimity as ``specific
neutrality'', equanimity as one of the divine abidings, equanimity of
jhāna and purifying equanimity are all different aspects of
tatramajjhattatā. 

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} also mentions aspects of equanimity of
vipassanā. @emph{Equanimity as a factor of enlightenment} is an aspect
of equanimity in vipassanā mentioned by the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV,
159). There are seven factors of enlightenment (sambojjhanga):
mindfulness (sati), investigation of Dhamma (Dhamma vicaya, which is
paññā), energy (viriya), enthusiasm (pīti), calm (passaddhi),
concentration (samādhi) and equanimity (upekkhā). Equanimity is in
this case again the cetasika tatramajjhattatā. When the enlightenment
factors have been developed they lead to enlightenment. They are not
developed separately, but they are developed together with
satipaṭṭhāna. The enlightenment factor of equanimity performs its own
function while it accompanies citta and the other cetasikas. We read
in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV, 159) about the enlightenment factor
of equanimity: ``He develops the equanimity enlightenment factor
depending on relinquishment''@footnote{Relinquishment is twofold: it
is the giving up of all defilements and also the inclination to or
``entering into'' nibbāna (Vis. XXI, 18).}. When right understanding
sees the unsatisfactoriness of all conditioned realities which arise
and then fall away, there will be indifference towards them. 

When satipaṭṭhāna is being developed we do not have to aim at the
development of equanimity because it develops together with insight.
The enlightenment factors reach completion through satipaṭṭhāna. When
conditioned realities have been clearly understood as they are,
enlightenment can be attained. 

There is yet another aspect of equanimity mentioned by the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} and this is the @emph{sixfold equanimity} which
is actually the equanimity which has reached completion at the
attainment of arahatship. We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IV,
157):

@quotation

Herein, six-factored equanimity is a name for the equanimity in one
whose cankers are destroyed. It is the mode of non-abandonment of the
natural state of purity when desirable or undesirable objects of the
six kinds come into focus in the six doors described thus: ``Here a
bhikkhu whose cankers are destroyed is neither glad nor sad on seeing
a visible object with the eye: he dwells in equanimity, mindful and
fully aware.'' (@emph{Gradual Sayings}, Book of the Sixes, Chapter I,
par 1).

@end quotation

The arahat has a perfect balance of mind. He is unruffled by the
worldly conditions of gain and loss, praise and blame, honour and
dishonour, well-being and misery. To us the sixfold equanimity of the
arahat seems to be far off. We should remember that this equanimity
can only be achieved by understanding, paññā, which has been developed
stage by stage. It is useless to have wishful thinking about this
perfect equanimity. It cannot be realized by longing for it. The fact
that this equanimity is sixfold can remind us that only when
understanding of what appears through the six doors has been developed
there can be equanimity towards all objects. 

Understanding can be developed now, when there is an object presenting
itself through one of the six doors. Sometimes the object is pleasant,
sometimes unpleasant. When understanding has not been developed it is
difficult to be ``balanced'', to ``stay in the middle'', without
attachment, without aversion. We may tell ourselves time and again
that life is only nāma and rūpa, conditioned realities which are
beyond control, but we are still impatient and we are still disturbed
by the events of life. However, when there is mindfulness, for
example, of visible object, understanding can realize it as a rūpa
which appears through the eye-door, not a thing, not a person. When
there is mindfulness of seeing, understanding can realize it as only
an experience, a type of nāma, no self who sees. When realities are
clearly known as not a thing, not a person, thus, as anattā, there
will be more even-mindedness and impartiality towards them. However,
this cannot be realized in the beginning. The arahat has eradicated
all defilements and thus he can have equanimity which has reached
perfection. He is undisturbed, patient and always contented.

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (II, Nidāna-vagga, Chapter XVI,
Kindred Sayings on Kassapa, par 1, Contented) about the arahat Kassapa
who was always contented. We read that the Buddha, while he was
staying at Sāvatthī, said to the monks:

Contented, monks, is this Kassapa with no matter what robe. He
commends contentment with no matter what robe, nor because of a robe
does he commit anything that is unseemly or unfit. If he has gotten no
robe, he is not perturbed; if he has gotten a robe, he enjoys it
without clinging or infatuation, committing no fault, discerning
danger, wise as to escape@footnote{He enjoys it as sufficing against
cold (the commentary to this sutta, the ``Sāratthappakāsini'').}. 

Even so is this Kassapa contented with no matter what alms, with no
matter what lodging, with no matter what equipment in medicines.

We then read that the Buddha exhorted the monks to train themselves
likewise. We can train ourselves by being mindful of whatever nāma or
rūpa appears now. Kassapa had developed the right conditions leading
to perfect equanimity.

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
Why is it difficult to know the characteristic of equanimity?

@item
When there is neither like nor dislike is there always equanimity?

@item
When we are generous there is equanimity with the kusala citta. What
is its function?

@item
When one begins to be mindful of nāma and rūpa which appear, is
there equanimity with the kusala citta?

@item
What is sixfold equanimity and why is it sixfold?

@item
In what way can sixfold equanimity be developed?

@end enumerate

@node Six Pairs of Beautiful Cetasikas
@chapter Six Pairs of Beautiful Cetasikas

Among the sobhana cetasikas, beautiful cetasikas, which accompany each
sobhana citta, there are twelve cetasikas which are classified as
@emph{six pairs}. Of each pair one cetasika is a quality pertaining to
the accompanying cetasikas and one a quality pertaining to citta. The
first pair is: 
@itemize

@item
tranquillity of body, kāya-passaddhi

@item
tranquillity of mind, citta-passaddhi

@end itemize

The Pāli term kāya means body, but it can also stand for the ``mental
body'' which are the cetasikas. According to the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi}
(par 40, 41) tranquillity of body is the calming, the tranquillizing
of the cetasikas and tranquillity of citta is the calming, the
tranquillizing of citta. Thus, tranquillity of body allays agitation
of the accompanying cetasikas and conditions the quiet, smooth and
even way of their functioning@footnote{See Abhidhamma Studies, by Ven.
Nyanaponika, Chapter IV, 10. In this section an explanation is given
about the ``Six Pairs'' (B.P.S. Kandy, 1976).}; tranquillity of
citta allays agitation of the citta it accompanies. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 130) explains
about tranquillity of body and tranquillity of mind:

@quotation
@dots{}These two states taken together have the characteristic of
pacifying the suffering of both mental factors and of consciousness;
the function of crushing the suffering of both; the manifestation of
an unwavering and cool state of both; and have mental factors and
consciousness as proximate cause. They are the opponents of the
corruptions, such as distraction (uddhacca), which cause the
disturbance of mental factors and of consciousness. 

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 144) gives a similar definition.
Tranquillity is the opponent of restlessness or distraction, uddhacca,
which prevents the arising of kusala citta. When we, for example,
strive after something with attachment, there is also restlessness and
there cannot be calm. Not only when we want to have something for
ourselves, but also when we merely like something such as a particular
colour there is restlessness, and then there is no calm. We keep on
being infatuated with pleasant sense objects and we may not notice
attachment which is subtle. At such moments there is restlessness. 

When the citta is kusala citta there is calm of citta and cetasikas,
there is no restlessness nor agitation at that moment. There is a
``cool state of mind'', no infatuation with the object which is
experienced, no restlessness. However, it is not easy to recognize
the characteristic of calm. The different types of citta succeed one
another very rapidly and shortly after the kusala cittas have fallen
away akusala cittas tend to arise. Right understanding has to be keen
in order to know the characteristic of calm. If there is no right
understanding we may take for calm what is not calm but another
reality. For example, when we are alone, in a quiet place, we may
think that there is calm while there is actually attachment to
silence.

There are likely to be misunderstandings about calm. What we call calm
or tranquillity in conventional language is not the same as the
realities of tranquillity of cetasikas and tranquillity of citta.
Someone may think that he is calm when he is free from worry, but this
calm may not be kusala at all. There may be citta rooted in attachment
which thinks of something else in order not to worry. At such a moment
he cannot at the same time think of the object of his worry since
citta can experience only one object at a time. Or people may do
breathing exercises in order to become relaxed. Tranquillity of
cetasikas and tranquillity of citta which are sobhana cetasikas are
not the same as a feeling of relaxation which is connected with
attachment. We should know the characteristic of true calm which is
wholesome. 

There are many degrees of calm. When we are generous or observe the
moral precepts there is calm of cetasikas and of citta. At such
moments there is no restlessness, agitation or worry. The feeling
which accompanies the kusala citta is also calm. We may notice the
difference between pleasant feeling which accompanies attachment and
pleasant feeling which accompanies generosity; these feelings have
different qualities. Those who have accumulated inclinations for
higher degrees of calm can develop it if there is right understanding
which knows precisely the characteristic of calm. Those who are able
to cultivate samatha and attain jhāna experience a high degree of calm
since there are at the moments of jhāna no sense impressions and thus
no enslavement to them. However, even the calm of the highest stage of
jhāna cannot eradicate defilements. They will arise again after the
jhānacittas have fallen away. 

People in the Buddha's time and also people before his time developed
calm, even to the degree of jhāna, if they had accumulated the skill
and the inclination to do so. The development of calm is not
specifically Buddhist. The fact that the Buddha and his disciples
developed calm to the stage of jhāna does not mean that everybody has
to develop jhāna in order to be able to also develop vipassanā. The
Buddha explained that also jhānacitta could be object of insight, in
order to help those who were able to attain jhāna not to cling to it,
but to understand it as it is: impermanent and not self. We should
remember this whenever we read in the scriptures about the attainment
of jhāna. If someone has accumulated the capability to reach higher
degrees of calm even to the stage of jhāna, they will arise because of
conditions. Anything which arises can be object of awareness, and thus
also jhāna. The attainment of jhāna is not an aim in itself, neither
is it a necessary requirement for the attainment of enlightenment. 

We can have moments of calm in our daily life when we study the
teachings and reflect on them in a wholesome way. The object of
reflection is then actually one of the forty meditation subjects of
samatha, that is, recollection of the Dhamma. This meditation subject
comprises recollection on the teachings as well as recollection on
nibbāna and the eight types of lokuttara cittas which experience it,
the ``nine supramundane dhammas'', included in the Dhamma which is the
second of the Triple Gem. There can also be moments of calm when we
develop loving kindness or one of the other meditation subjects which
suit our inclinations. However, we should remember that it is
extremely difficult to attain jhāna or even
``access-concentration''@footnote{See Chapter 6.}. We read in the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (XII, 8) that only very few people, ``one in a
hundred or a thousand'' are able to do so. If someone only wants to
develop calm without right understanding of its characteristic, he is
likely to cling to calm without knowing it. If calm arises it does so
because of conditions and there is no self who can exert power over
it.

Tranquillity of cetasikas and of citta accompany each kusala citta and
thus, they arise also when insight is being developed. When there is
right understanding of a nāma or a rūpa which appears there is calm at
that moment. When, for example, visible object is known as only a rūpa
appearing through the eyesense, not a person, there is calm. At that
moment there cannot be disturbance caused by desire nor can there be
annoyance. Even when someone treats us badly there can be right
understanding of the objects appearing through the six doors, and then
we are not perturbed nor afraid. 

Calm is one of the factors of enlightenment. We read in the @emph{Book
of Analysis} (Chapter 10, Analysis of the Enlightenment Factors, par
469): 

@quotation
@dots{}That which is calmness of body (cetasikas), that calmness
enlightenment factor is for full knowledge, for enlightenment, for
full emancipation also. That which is calmness of consciousness, that
calmness-enlightenment factor is for full knowledge, for
enlightenment, for full emancipation also.

@end quotation

As right understanding develops the enlightenment factor of calm
develops as well. We do not have to aim at calm. When the
enlightenment factor of calm accompanies at the moment of
enlightenment lokuttara citta, it is also lokuttara. As defilements
are eradicated at the subsequent stages of enlightenment there will be
more peace of mind, less restlessness. The arahat who has eradicated
all defilements has reached true calm which cannot be disturbed again
by defilements. We read in the @emph{Dhammapada} (verse 96) about the
arahat:

@example

Calm is his mind, 
calm is his speech, 
calm is his action, 
who, rightly knowing, is wholly freed, 
perfectly peaceful, and equiposed.

@end example

The next pair of sobhana cetasikas is: 
@itemize

@item
lightness of cetasikas, kāya-lahutā 

@item
lightness of citta, citta-lahutā

@end itemize

According to the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par 42, 43) this pair of
cetasikas consists in the absence of sluggishness and inertia, they
have ``alertness in varying''. The meaning of this will be clearer
when we read what the ``Mūla-Tīkā''@footnote{A subcommentary quoted by
Ven. Nyanaponika in Abhidhamma Studies, Chapter IV, 10.} states about
lightness of citta: ``the capacity of the mind to turn very quickly to
a wholesome object or to the contemplation of impermanence, etc.'' 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 30) explains:

@quotation

Kāya-lightness is buoyancy of mental factors; citta-lightness is
buoyancy of consciousness. They have the characteristic of suppressing
the heaviness of the one and the other; the function of crushing
heaviness in both; the manifestation of opposition to sluggishness in
both, and have mental factors and consciousness as proximate cause.
They are the opponents of the corruptions, such as sloth and torpor,
which cause heaviness and rigidity in mental factors and
consciousness.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 145) gives a similar definition.
Lightness is the opponent of sloth and torpor (thīna and middha),
which cause heaviness and sluggishness with regard to kusala. When
there is akusala citta, there is mental heaviness and we are unable to
perform any kind of kusala. Kusala citta needs confidence (saddhā), it
needs mindfulness or non-forgetfulness and it also needs mental
lightness which suppresses heaviness and rigidity. When there is
lightness of cetasikas and of citta they react with alertness so that
the opportunity for kusala is not wasted.

There are many moments of unawareness. There are seeing, visible
object or hardness time and again, but we may be dull and tired
without any interest in awareness. However, when mindfulness arises
there are also lightness of cetasikas and of citta which perform their
functions: all tiredness is gone and there is alertness. Lightness is
needed for the development of right understanding. When understanding
of what appears through one of the six doors is being developed, there
is also lightness which ``crushes'' sluggishness. If this moment is
not wasted realities can eventually be seen as impermanent and not
self.

Another pair of the sobhana cetasikas is: 
@itemize

@item
pliancy of cetasikas, kāya-mudutā 

@item
pliancy of citta, citta-mudutā
@end itemize

According to the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par 44, 45) this pair of
cetasikas consist in suavity, smoothness and absence of rigidity. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} ( I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 130) explains:

@quotation

They have the characteristic of suppressing the rigidity of mental
factors and of consciousness; the function of crushing the same in
both; the manifestation or effect of setting up no resistance; and
have mental factors and consciousness as proximate cause. They are the
opponents of the corruptions, such as opinionatedness (diṭṭhi) and
conceit which cause mental rigidity.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 146) gives a similar definition. 

Pliancy of cetasikas and of citta are the opponents of wrong view and
conceit. Wrong view causes rigidity and inflexibility. When someone,
for example, is attached to wrong practice of the eightfold Path it
shows that there is mental rigidity. He may stick to his old habits
and way of thinking and then it is very difficult to eradicate wrong
view. Someone may, for example, think that he should be at leisure or
in a quiet place before he can develop right understanding. Even when
we know in theory that this is not right it may happen that we still
presume that there cannot be awareness when we are tired or in a
hurry. Such presumptions are a hindrance to develop understanding of
whatever reality appears in our daily life. When we have listened to
the Dhamma and we consider it there can be a beginning of the
development of insight. We should not expect understanding to be
perfect at once, but at least we can begin to develop it now. 

As we have read in the definition, pliancy of cetasikas and of citta
are the opponents also of conceit. When there is conceit there is
mental rigidity. We are inclined to compare ourselves time and again
with others in a conceited way as regards health, appearance, gain,
honour or intelligence. Conceit is extremely hard to eradicate, only
the arahat has eradicated it completely.

Pliancy of cetasikas and of citta assist the kusala citta so that
there is no mental rigidity or intolerance, but open-mindedness to
what is right. The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I Part IV, Chapter II,
151) explains further on about mental pliancy that it is suavity,
non-roughness and non-rigidity. When there is loving kindness there is
suavity and gentleness. Mental pliancy or malleability is
indispensable for each wholesome action. Pliancy is also necessary in
order to listen to the Dhamma, to receive it with open-mindedness and
to be mindful of the reality which appears in order to know it as it
is. 

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (IV, Book of the Eights, Chapter
II, par 2, Sīha the general) that Sīha visited the Buddha and
questioned him on different points. The Buddha knew that Sīha had
accumulated right understanding and that it was the right time for him
to receive the Dhamma. He did not explain to Sīha immediately the four
Noble Truths, but he gave him a gradual discourse. We read:

@quotation

Then the Exalted One preached a graduated discourse to Sīha, the
general, that is to say: on almsgiving, the precepts and on heaven. He
set forth the peril, the folly and the depravity of lusts and the
blessedness of renunciation.

And when the Exalted One knew that the heart of Sīha, the general, was
clear, malleable, free from hindrance, uplifted and lucid, then he
revealed that teaching of Dhamma which Buddhas alone have won, that is
to say: Dukkha, its coming to be, its ending and the Way. Just as a
clean cloth, free of all stain, will take dye perfectly; even so in
Sīha, the general, seated there, there arose the spotless, stainless
vision of Dhamma; that whatsoever be conditioned by coming to be, all
that is subject to ending.

@end quotation

It was the right time for Sīha to receive the Dhamma. He saw things as
they are and attained enlightenment.

Another pair of sobhana cetasikas is: 
@itemize

@item
wieldiness of cetasikas, kāya-kammaññatā 

@item
wieldiness of citta, citta-kammaññatā
@end itemize

Kammaññatā can be translated as wieldiness or
workableness@footnote{See Dhammasangaṇi, par46, 47.}. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 131) explains that
they suppress unwieldiness in cetasikas and citta, and that they
should be regarded as ``bringing faith in objects of faith, and
patient application in works of advantage, and are like purity of
gold.''@footnote{See also Visuddhimagga, XIV, 147.} 

When there is wieldiness, citta and cetasikas are like gold which has
been made workable. The ``Mūla-Tīkā''@footnote{See Abhidhamma Studies
by Ven. Nyanaponika, Chapter IV, 10.} expresses this as follows:

@quotation

Workableness signifies that specific or suitable degree of pliancy or
softness which makes the gold, that is, the mind, workable. While the
mind is in the flames of passion it is too soft to be workable, as
molten gold is. If, on the contrary, the mind is too rigid then it is
comparable to untempered gold. 

@end quotation

Wieldiness is the opponent of the ``hindrances'', such as sensuous
desire (kāmacchanda) and anger or hate (vyāpāda), which cause mental
unwieldiness. We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (V, Mahā-vagga,
Book II, Chapter IV, par 3, Corruptions) about five corruptions of
gold whereby gold is impure, brittle, not pliant or workable. It is
the presence of other metals, of iron, copper, tin, lead and silver
which makes it unwieldy. Even so the five hindrances make the mind
unwieldy. We read:

@quotation
@dots{}Likewise, monks, there are those five defilements of the
mind, owing to which the mind is not pliant, not workable, impure,
brittle and is not perfectly composed for the extinction of the
passions. Which are those five? Sensual desire, ill will, sloth and
torpor, agitation and worry, doubt---these are the defilements of the
mind owing to which the mind is not pliant, not workable, impure,
brittle and is not perfectly composed for the extinction of passions.

@end quotation

As we have seen, according to the @emph{Atthasālinī}, wieldiness
brings faith (saddhā) in objects of faith and patient application in
kusala. Wieldiness is necessary for each kind of kusala, for
generosity (dāna), for morality (sīla), for the development of calm
and for the development of insight. Wieldiness makes the mind workable
so that one can apply oneself to kusala with confidence and with
patience. When someone, for example, wants to develop calm with loving
kindness as meditation subject , he cannot be successful when there is
no mental wieldiness. When there is ill-will there is rigidity instead
of wieldiness. In order to have loving kindness for all beings, not
only for dear friends, but also for people one does not know or even
for one's enemies, there has to be wieldiness. Without wieldiness one
cannot succeed in becoming calm with any meditation subject. 

Wieldiness of cetasikas and of citta also perform their functions in
the development of insight; they are conditions for patience in the
development of right understanding of nāma and rūpa. When there is
right understanding of a nāma or a rūpa as only a conditioned reality,
not self, there is wieldiness of mind. The development of insight
leads to the eradication of the hindrances. The person who has
eradicated them has no more unwieldiness but perfect wieldiness.

Another pair of sobhana cetasikas is: 
@itemize

@item
proficiency of cetasikas, kāya-pāguññatā 

@item
proficiency of citta, citta-pāguññatā

@end itemize

According to the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par 48, 49) this pair of
cetasikas consists in fitness, competence and efficiency. Pāguññatā is
fitness, competence or efficiency in the performance of kusala. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 131) explains
that proficiency of cetasikas and of citta suppress mental illness and
that they are the opponents of the corruptions, such as diffidence,
which cause mental illness@footnote{See also the Visuddhimagga, XIV,
148.}.

When the citta is akusala citta, there is diffidence, lack of
confidence in kusala and then there is mental sickness. Mental
proficiency assists the kusala citta and then citta and cetasikas are
healthy and skilful so that they can perform their functions in the
most efficient way. 

There are many degrees of efficiency in kusala. When right
understanding is being developed, it conditions proficiency and
skilfulness in all kinds of kusala. The sotāpanna has eradicated wrong
view, doubt and stinginess, and he will never neglect the five moral
precepts. His generosity and his observance of morality is purer than
the generosity and morality of the non-ariyan, he has no clinging to a
wrong idea of ``my kusala''. His confidence in the Buddha's teachings
has become unshakable, it has become a ``power''. He has, in
comparison to the non-ariyan, a higher degree of efficiency and
competence with regard to kusala. He can assist others in a competent
and efficient way, and thus we see that the development of right
understanding also bears on one's relationship with others. We read in
the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (V, Book of the Elevens, Chapter II, par 4,
Subhūti) that the Buddha spoke to Subhūti about the traditional marks
of belief (saddhā) in a believer. One of these ``traditional marks''
is the following:

@quotation
@dots{}Again, in all the undertakings of his fellows in the
Brahma-life, be they matters weighty or trivial, he is shrewd and
energetic, possessing ability to give proper consideration thereto, as
to what is the fit thing to do and how to manage it. In so far as a
monk is such, this also is a traditional mark@dots{}

@end quotation

There is a higher degree of proficiency as higher stages of
enlightenment are attained and defilements eradicated. At the stage of
arahatship proficiency has reached perfection.

The last pair of sobhana cetasikas is: 
@itemize

@item
uprightness of cetasika, kāya-ujukatā 

@item
uprightness of citta, citta-ujukatā
@end itemize

According to the @emph{Dhammasangaṇi} (par 50, 51) this pair of
cetasikas consists in straightness and rectitude, being without
deflection, twist or crookedness. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 131) explains
that uprightness of cetasikas and of citta crush crookedness and that
they are the opponents of the corruptions, such as deception and
craftiness, which cause crookedness in mental factors and
consciousness@footnote{See also the Visuddhimagga, XIV, 149.}.

Uprightness is the opponent of deception and craftiness. There may be
moments that one's behaviour is insincere. We read in the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (I, 60-84) about the behaviour of the monk who
tries to obtain the requisites by hypocrisy, by hinting, flattery,
indirect talk, grimaces and gestures. He pretends to be better than he
in reality is in order to be admired. We read (I, 70):

@quotation

Here someone of evil wishes, a prey to wishes, eager to be admired,
(thinking) ``Thus people will admire me'', composes his way of
walking, composes his way of lying down; he walks studiedly, stands
studiedly, sits studiedly, lies down studiedly; he walks as though
concentrated, stands, sits, lies down as though concentrated; and he
is one who meditates in public@dots{}

@end quotation

We all want to be admired and therefore we may pretend to be better
than we really are. Even when it seems that we are generous there tend
to be selfish motives for our actions. We may expect something in
return, we want to be praised, to be popular. Speech which seems
pleasing may be directed towards selfish gain. Uprightness crushes
such insincerity. It assists each kusala citta. There are many degrees
of uprightness. To the extent that right understanding develops also
uprightness develops. The ariyan is called the person who is on the
straight, true and proper way (ujupatipanno, Vis. VII, 90-92). He is
on the middle Path, avoiding extremes; he is on the Path which leads
to the eradication of defilements. One is on the middle Path when
there is the development of understanding of whatever reality appears,
even if it is akusala. We can develop right understanding in daily
life, no matter whether we laugh or cry, no matter whether we are
angry or generous. Thus we will learn the truth, we will learn that
each reality which arises is conditioned and that it is non-self. In
the above quoted explanation of insincerity in the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} we read about the monk who walks, stands, sits
and lies down as though concentrated. Someone may believe that he is
doing these things with concentration which is kusala, although this
is not so. When there is mindfulness of realities we can find out
whether the citta which presents itself is kusala citta or akusala
citta. We will come to know ourselves and thus we will become more
sincere. The person who is on the middle Way is honest with himself
and he does not pretend that he is without defilements. Defilements
can only be eradicated if they are known as they are. Straightness of
cetasikas and of citta accompany the citta which develops
understanding and they assist the citta in this task. 

Summarizing the six pairs of sobhana cetasikas, they are:

@enumerate

@item
calm of cetasikas, kāya-passaddhi

calm of citta, citta-passaddhi

@item
lightness of cetasikas, kāya-lahutā

lightness of citta, citta-lahutā

@item
pliancy of cetasikas, kāya-mudutā

pliancy of citta, citta-mudutā

@item
wieldiness of cetasikas, kāya-kammaññatā

wieldiness of citta, citta-kammaññatā 

@item
proficiency of cetasikas, kāya-pāguññatā

proficiency of citta, citta-pāguññatā

@item
uprightness of cetasikas, kāya-ujukatā

uprightness of citta, citta-ujukatā

@end enumerate

These six pairs accompany all sobhana cittas. They are necessary for
each kind of kusala, be it generosity (dāna), morality (sīla), the
development of calm (samatha) or insight (vipassanā). They assist the
kusala citta and its accompanying cetasikas, so that wholesomeness can
be performed in an efficient way. They are counteractive to the
hindrances of sensuous desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor,
restlessness and regret, and doubt. When the six pairs are present the
hindrances do not arise; citta and cetasikas are healthy and skilful
in performing their functions. Right understanding is the factor which
conditions most of all the development of all the wholesome qualities
represented by the six pairs. In the arahat they have reached
perfection. 

As we have seen, there are at least @emph{nineteen sobhana cetasikas}
which accompany each sobhana citta@footnote{See Appendix 8 for a
summary of them and of the sobhana cittas they accompany.}. All these
cetasikas accompany the sobhana cittas of the sense-sphere (kāmāvacara
sobhana cittas), the sobhana cittas which are rūpa-jhānacittas (of
fine-material jhāna) and arūpa-jhānacittas (of immaterial jhāna), and
the sobhana cittas which are lokuttara cittas. This does not mean that
all these sobhana cittas are accompanied by only nineteen sobhana
cetasikas. In addition to the nineteen sobhana cetasikas which
accompany each sobhana citta, there are six more, and I shall deal
with these in the following chapters. 

@subsection Questions
@enumerate

@item
Why are pliancy of cetasikas and of citta the opponents of wrong view
and conceit?

@item
Why is it said that there is freedom from illness when there is
proficiency of cetasikas and of citta?

@item
Why is diffidence, lack of faith (saddhā), the cause of mental
illness?

@item
Why has the sotāpanna a higher degree of proficiency in kusala than
the non-ariyan?

@item
Why does uprightness develop to the extent that right understanding
of realities develops?

@item
Why is the ariyan called a person who walks straight?

@item
Which factor conditions most of all the growth of all wholesome
qualities?
@end enumerate

@node The Three Abstinences
@chapter The Three Abstinences
@section The Three Abstinences (virati-cetasikas)

There are twenty five sobhana cetasikas in all which arise only with
sobhana cittas. Nineteen among these arise with every sobhana citta,
whereas six of them do not arise with every sobhana citta. Among these
six sobhana cetasikas there are three which are @emph{abstinences} or
@emph{virati-cetasikas}. They are:
@itemize

@item
abstinence from wrong speech, vaci-duccarita virati

@item
abstinence from wrong action, kāya-duccarita virati

@item
abstinence from wrong livelihood, ājīva-duccarita virati
@end itemize

As regards abstinence from wrong speech, this is abstinence from
lying, slandering, harsh speech and idle, frivolous talk. Abstinence
from wrong action comprises abstinence from killing, stealing and
sexual misconduct. Abstinence from wrong livelihood is abstinence from
wrong speech and wrong action committed for the sake of one's
livelihood.

We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter I, 133)
about the three kinds of abstinences:

@quotation
@dots{}As regards characteristic, etc., it has been said that each
of these three does not trespass nor tread on objects of the other
two. They have the function of shrinking from the same; and they have
faith (saddhā), sense of shame (hiri), fear of blame (ottappa),
contentment and more, as proximate antecedents. They should be
regarded as produced by the averted state of the mind from evil
action.

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XIV, 155) gives a similar definition.

We read that each of the three does not tread on objects of the other
two. In the case of cittas of the sense-sphere (kāmāvacara cittas)
these three kinds of abstinence arise one at a time, since there is
abstinence from one kind of evil at a time. When we, for example,
abstain from harsh speech, the cetasika which is abstinence from wrong
speech accompanies the mahā-kusala citta and we do not abstain from
wrong action at the same time, since there is only one citta at a
time. When we are harshly spoken to and we do not answer back there is
not always kusala citta with abstinence from wrong speech. We may keep
silent with citta rooted in ignorance or with citta rooted in aversion
and then there is akusala citta. If we abstain from retorting
unpleasant speech with kindness and patience there is kusala citta
accompanied by the cetasika which is abstinence from wrong speech. 

As we have seen, confidence in wholesomeness (saddhā), shame (hiri),
fear of blame (ottappa) and contentment are among the proximate causes
of the abstinences. When there is contentment or fewness of wishes
there are favourable conditions for observing morality. 

As regards abstinence from wrong livelihood for laymen, we read in the
@emph{Gradual Sayings} (III, Book of the Fives, Chapter XVIII, par 7)
about five kinds of trades laymen should abstain from:

@quotation

Monks, these five trades ought not to be plied by a lay-disciple. What
five?

Trade in weapons, trade in human beings, trade in flesh, trade in
spirits and trade in poison.

Verily, monks, these five trades ought not to be plied by a
lay-disciple.

@end quotation

As to trade in flesh, the commentary (Manorathapūraṇi) explains: ``He
breeds and sells pigs, deer, etc.'' It is also wrong livelihood to
receive bribes for services which are one's duty to perform, or bribes
for something one ought not to do.

There is also wrong livelihood for monks. The monk should not try to
obtain the requisites of robes, almsfood, dwelling and medicine with
unlawful means, such as by way of hinting or talking in a clever way.
He should not disparage others in order to obtain gain and
honour@footnote{See Visuddhimagga I, 60 and following.}. The monk's
life should be a life of contentment with little. If he realizes that
the observance of the Vinaya should not be separated from the
development of right understanding he will be able to lead a life of
purity. 

When someone lies or uses dishonest means in order to obtain something
for himself he acts in this way because of selfish desire. He hopes to
gain something, but sooner or later he will suffer unpleasant results.
Whenever we give in to wrong speech or wrong action we are enslaved
and we are blinded, we do not realize the consequences. At that moment
there is no shame which shrinks from evil and no fear of the
consequences of evil. While we abstain from evil there are confidence
in wholesomeness, shame and fear of blame and there is no selfish
desire. Understanding, paññā, may or may not accompany the kusala
citta which abstains from evil. As right understanding develops there
will be less clinging to the concept of self and consequently there
will be more conditions to abstain from wrong speech, wrong action and
wrong livelihood. 

It is not easy to know when there is kusala citta accompanied by one
of the three abstinences. So long as it is not known precisely when
there is kusala citta and when akusala citta, the characteristics of
the cetasikas which are abstention from wrong speech, wrong action and
wrong livelihood cannot be known either. It is of no use to try to
focus on these realities since there are many sobhana cetasikas
accompanying the kusala citta while we abstain from evil and it is
difficult to know their different characteristics. When the
characteristic of abstinence appears there can be mindfulness of it in
order to be able to realize that it is not self who abstains. 

There are different degrees of abstinence and the @emph{Atthasālinī}
(I, Book I, Part III, Chapter VI, 103, 104) distinguishes between
three kinds: abstaining ``in spite of opportunity obtained'',
abstaining because of observance (of precepts) and abstaining by way
of eradication. As to the first kind we read:

When they who have not undertaken to observe any precept, but who
reflecting on their own birth, age, experience, etc. and saying ``It
is not fit for us to do such a bad thing'', do not transgress an
object actually met with, the abstinence is to be considered as ``in
spite of opportunity''@dots{}

Thus, also those who have not undertaken the precepts can have shame
and fear of blame and abstain from wrong speech, wrong action and
wrong livelihood. Although the opportunity for wrong speech or wrong
action presents itself, they abstain from it when they take into
consideration the family they belong to, the education they have had
and their experience. They do not want to behave like fools and they
fear the consequences of evil conduct.

The second kind of abstention is by way of observance of the
precepts. When someone has undertaken the precepts and he considers
it beneficial to observe them this can be a condition to abstain from
wrong conduct. There are many degrees of observing the precepts.
One's morality, sīla, may be limited (Vis. I, 31). Someone may have
the intention not to kill living beings, but when his health or his
life is in danger, or his relatives insist that he should kill, for
example, insects, he may not be able to observe the precept which is
abstention from killing. Thus his morality is limited, it is not
enduring. Only through the development of right understanding can
morality become enduring.

The sotāpanna has eradicated wrong view and thus, when he observes the
precepts, he does not take the observing for self. He will never
transgress the five precepts, even if his life is in danger, and thus
his morality is of a higher degree than the morality of the
non-ariyan. We read about the third kind of abstinence, abstinence by
way of eradication, mentioned by the @emph{Atthasālinī}, that it
should be understood as associated with the ariyan path:

@quotation
@dots{}When that Path has once arisen, not even the thought, ``we
will kill a creature'', arises in the ariyans.

@end quotation

If right understanding of realities is not developed all kinds of
defilements can arise on account of the objects which are experienced.
When a pleasant object is experienced through the eyes, we tend to be
immediately infatuated with it. We should realize that what is seen is
only visible object, a kind of rūpa which does not last. Visible
object can be seen just for a moment, it cannot be owned. Still, we
make ourselves believe that we can own it. We want to get it for
ourselves and because of it we may even commit evil deeds. In the
ultimate sense there are no people or things, only nāma and rūpa which
arise and then fall away immediately.

When we realize the consequences of evil conduct we will be urged to
develop right understanding which can eradicate defilements. We read
in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (III, Book of the Fives, Chapter XXII,
par 3, Morals) about disadvantages of evil conduct:

@quotation

Monks, there are five disadvantages to one wanting morals, failing in
morals. What five?

Consider, monks, the man without morals, failing in morals---he comes
to suffer much loss in wealth through neglect. This, monks, is the
first disadvantage to one wanting morals, failing in morals.

Or an evil rumour spreads about him. This is the second
disadvantage@dots{}

Or whatever group he approach, whether nobles or brāhmans,
householders or recluses, he does so without confidence and confused.
This is the third disadvantage@dots{}

Or he dies muddled (in thought). This is the fourth
disadvantage@dots{}

Or on the breaking up of the body after death he arises in the wayward
way, the ill way, the abyss, hell. This is the fifth
disadvantage@dots{}

Verily, monks, these are the five disadvantages to one wanting morals,
failing in morals.

(The opposite is said of one perfect in morals.)

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (I, 154) mentions the following dangers of
failure in virtue:

@quotation
@dots{}Furthermore, on account of his unvirtuousness an unvirtuous
person is displeasing to deities and human beings, is uninstructable
by his fellows in the life of purity, suffers when unvirtuousness is
censured, and is remorseful when the virtuous are praised@dots{}

@end quotation

We then read about many other disadvantages. For example, the
unvirtuous are always nervous, like a man who is everyone's enemy, he
is unfit to live with and incapable of reaching the distinction of
attainment. Although he imagines that he is happy, yet he is not,
since he reaps suffering.

When we neglect morality we may suffer afterwards from remorse. When
we, for example, give in to slandering we may enjoy it at that moment,
but afterwards remorse may arise and then there is no joy, no peace of
mind. If we abstain from slandering there is no opportunity for
remorse. When we abstain from slandering with kindness and
consideration for others the citta is quite different from the citta
which is forgetful of morality and gives in to slandering. We may be
able to learn the different characteristics of such moments.

When one begins to develop insight one cannot expect to have purity of
morality immediately. We are still full of attachment, aversion and
ignorance, and these unwholesome roots can condition wrong speech,
wrong action and wrong livelihood. Only the sotāpanna has no more
conditions to commit akusala kamma which can lead to an unhappy
rebirth. We should have determination to develop right understanding
of whatever reality appears. When we become angry and utter harsh
speech there can be moments of awareness of nāma and rūpa in between
the moments of anger. Also anger should be known as it is, as only a
type of nāma which is conditioned, not ``my anger'', otherwise it can
never be eradicated. We find the unpleasant feeling which accompanies
anger very disagreeable and we may have desire for just calm. Then
there is clinging again. Also the subtle desire for calm should be
known as it is. We should consider what our aim is: only calm, or
right understanding of whatever reality appears. We may think that it
is too difficult to develop understanding of whatever reality appears,
we want to delay it when we are tired, depressed or in an angry mood.
However, if there is no beginning of the development of right
understanding, even at those moments we consider unfavourable, it will
always be difficult. If one perseveres in developing understanding of
the present moment, understanding can grow.

One may neglect the precepts because one thinks that they are too
difficult to observe. But if one considers the teachings more often
and starts to develop understanding, there will be more conditions for
remembering what is right and what is wrong in the different
situations of one's daily life. The aim of the development of right
understanding is the eradication of wrong view, ignorance and all the
other defilements. We cannot be perfect immediately, but we may see
the danger of neglecting morality and the benefit of observing it. 

We may not kill or steal, but we may be forgetful as far as our speech
is concerned. A word which can harm ourselves and others is uttered
before we realize it. We tend to disparage others because we are
attached to talking and want to keep the conversation going. When we
are slighted by someone else we are easily inclined to answer back.
Our self-esteem may be hurt and then we want to defend ourselves. Most
of the time we think of ourselves; we want to be honoured and praised.
We forget that it is beneficial to abstain from wrong speech and to
speak with kusala citta. How often in a day do we speak with kusala
citta?

The Buddha reminded the monks about right speech. We should remember
what the Buddha said about right speech in the @emph{Parable of the
Saw} (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 21):

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, when speaking to others you might speak at a right
time or at a wrong time; monks, when speaking to others you might
speak according to fact or not according to fact; monks, when speaking
to others you might speak gently or harshly; monks, when speaking to
others you might speak about what is connected with the goal or about
what is not connected with the goal; monks, when speaking to others
you might speak with a mind of friendliness or full of hatred. Herein,
monks, you should train yourselves thus: ``Neither will our minds
become perverted nor will we utter an evil speech, but kindly and
compassionate will we dwell, with a mind of friendliness, void of
hatred; and we will dwell having suffused that person with a mind of
friendliness; and, beginning with him, we will dwell having suffused
the whole world with a mind of friendliness that is far-reaching,
wide-spread, immeasurable, without enmity, without malevolence.'' This
is how you must train yourselves, monks.

@end quotation

When we give in to wrong speech there is no kindness and consideration
for other people's welfare. When there is loving kindness there is no
opportunity for wrong speech. We can and should develop loving
kindness in daily life and we should at the same time see the value of
observing morality, otherwise loving kindness cannot be sincere. Many
wholesome qualities have to be developed together with right
understanding so that eventually defilements can be eradicated. 

The abstinences which accompany cittas of the sense-sphere, kāmāvacara
cittas, arise only one at a time, but when lokuttara cittas arise, all
three abstinences accompany the lokuttara cittas, and then nibbāna is
the object. Thus, the object of the abstinences which are lokuttara is
different from the object of the abstinences which are of the
sense-sphere. The abstinences which are lokuttara are the right
speech, right action and right livelihood of the supramundane
eightfold Path. 

We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} (II, Part VIII, Chapter I, 219, 220)
about the right speech which is lokuttara, that is does not allow the
commission of wrong speech, that it cuts off the base of misconduct
and fulfils the path-factor. The same is said about right action which
cuts off the base of bodily misconduct and fulfils the path-factor,
and about right livelihood which cuts off the base of wrong livelihood
and fulfils the path-factor@footnote{See Dhammasangaṇi, Part I,
Chapter V, par299-301.}. Thus, in cutting off the conditions for
wrong conduct the three abstinences which are lokuttara fulfil their
functions as path-factors. 

Defilements are eradicated subsequently at the different stages of
enlightenment. When the path-consciousness, the magga-citta, of the
sotāpanna arises, the bases of the three kinds of wrong action which
are killing, stealing and sexual misconduct, and of the kind of wrong
speech which is lying and also the base of wrong livelihood are cut
off. The kinds of wrong speech which are slandering, harsh speech and
idle talk have not been eradicated, but they cannot have the intensity
anymore of akusala kamma patha (unwholesome course of action) which
can produce an unhappy rebirth. The sakadāgāmī, the person who has
attained the second stage of enlightenment, has not eradicated these
kinds of speech, but at this stage the tendencies to such speech have
decreased. The anāgāmī, the person who has attained the third stage of
enlightenment, has eradicated the tendency to slandering and harsh
speech but not yet the tendency to idle talk. The tendency to idle
talk has only been eradicated by the arahat. We may not lie, slander
or utter harsh speech, but still our speech may not be motivated by
kusala citta which is generous and intent on helping others or on
explaining the Dhamma to others. Instead we may indulge in idle,
useless talk. We may, for example, chat with akusala citta about
accidents or other events which happen during the day. However, we
can also talk with kusala citta about events such as accidents; for
example, we may talk about an accident in order to remind ourselves
and others of the shortness of life. Idle talk is done with akusala
citta. The monk should train himself to speak only about subjects
which lead to the goal, such as fewness of wishes and mental
development, and he should not indulge in idle talk. A layman does not
lead the monk's life, but even while one talks about useless things
with akusala citta there can, in between, be moments of awareness of
nāma and rūpa. The arahat has no more conditions for the laylife and
no more tendencies to idle, useless talk.

Summarizing the cittas which can be accompanied by the abstinences,
they are:
@itemize

@item
eight mahā-kusala cittas which are of the sense-sphere 
(kāmāvacara kusala cittas)

@item
eight (or forty) lokuttara cittas which are accompanied by all three
abstinences
@end itemize

In the case of the mahā-kusala cittas, only one kind of abstinence
arises at a time, as the occasion presents itself; not each
mahā-kusala citta is accompanied by one of the abstinences. The
abstinences are not among the nineteen sobhana cetasikas which
accompany each sobhana citta; they do not accompany vipāka-cittas
since they are the actual abstinence from wrong conduct. Neither do
the three abstinences accompany the mahā-kiriyacittas of the arahat
since there are for those who have eradicated all defilements no more
opportunities for abstention.

The three abstinences do not accompany rūpāvacara cittas
(fine-material jhānacittas) and arūpāvacara cittas (immaterial
jhānacittas) since there is no opportunity for abstention when the
citta is jhānacitta, the citta which does not experience
sense-impressions.

The three abstinences which together accompany the lokuttara cittas
are the three factors which are the right speech, right action and
right livelihood of the eightfold Path. They accompany the
magga-cittas and they also accompany the phala-cittas
(fruition-consciousness). The phala-cittas are the results of the
magga-cittas, but they are different from other types of vipākacittas.
The phala-cittas are lokuttara vipākacittas experiencing nibbāna, and
they immediately succeed the magga-citta which produces them, in the
same process. 

Thus we see that there are many kinds and degrees of the three
abstinences. There is abstinence without right understanding and with
right understanding. When lokuttara citta arises all three abstinences
accompany the lokuttara citta and they are also lokuttara.

@subsection Questions
@enumerate

@item
Why can, in the case of cittas of the sense-sphere, only one of the
three abstinences arise at a time?

@item
At which moment do all three abstinences arise together? Which
function do they have in that case?

@item
Can the abstinences accompany mahā-vipākacitta of the sense-sphere?

@item
Why can the abstinences not accompany jhānacitta?

@item
When is wrong livelihood eradicated?

@item
What is idle talk?

@item
When we talk about an accident is it always motivated by akusala
citta?

@item
Why is fewness of wishes one of the proximate causes of abstinence
from wrong conduct?
@end enumerate

@node Compassion and Sympathetic Joy
@chapter Compassion and Sympathetic Joy
@section  Compassion (karuṇā) and Sympathetic Joy (muditā)

Compassion, karuṇā, and sympathetic joy, muditā, are among the six
sobhana cetasikas which do not arise with every sobhana citta. They
accompany kusala citta only when there is an opportunity for them.
They are classified among the four ``divine abidings'',
brahma-vihāras@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi, par258-261.}. The
other two divine abidings are, as we have seen, loving-kindness,
mettā, and equanimity, upekkhā@footnote{The term upekkhā does not,
in this case, stand for indifferent feeling, but it stands for
equanimity.}. The divine abidings are called ``illimitables''
(appamaññas), because when they have been developed in samatha as
meditation subjects which condition calm and when, by means of them,
jhāna has been attained, they can be directed towards innumerable
beings.

As regards compassion, we read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IX, 94):

@quotation

Compassion is characterized as promoting the aspect of allaying
suffering. Its function resides in not bearing others' suffering. It
is manifested as non-cruelty. Its proximate cause is to see
helplessness in those overwhelmed by suffering. It succeeds when it
makes cruelty subside and it fails when it produces sorrow.

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part V, Chapter XIII, 193) gives a
similar definition. 

Compassion has as its near enemy ``grief, based on the homelife''.
This is dosa, conditioned by attachment which is connected with
``worldly life'', that is, attachment to people and pleasant things.
Compassion has as its far enemy cruelty (Vis. IX, 99). One cannot
practise compassion while one is cruel. 

As regards the near enemy, grief or aversion, we may take for
compassion what is actually aversion, dosa. When we see someone else
who is in miserable circumstances, there tend to be different types of
cittas, not only kusala cittas with compassion but also akusala
cittas. There are moments of compassion when we wish to help someone
in order to allay his suffering and there can also be moments of
aversion about his suffering. Compassion and aversion can arise
closely one after the other and it is difficult to know their
different characteristics. Through right understanding one can come
to know their difference. 

Compassion is different from loving kindness. Loving kindness is the
cetasika which is non-aversion, adosa. This cetasika arises with every
sobhana citta, but when it has the special quality of loving kindness,
mettā, it is directed towards beings; it ``sees the lovableness of
beings'', according to the @emph{Visuddhimagga} and promotes their
welfare. When there is loving kindness one treats others as friends.
Compassion wants to allay beings' suffering. Thus, the objectives of
loving kindness and compassion are different. For example, in the case
of visiting a sick person, there can be moments of loving-kindness
when we give him flowers or wish him well, but there can also be
moments of compassion when we notice his suffering. 

We may think that since compassion is directed towards beings who are
suffering, there cannot be pleasant feeling accompanying it. However,
compassion can arise with pleasant feeling or with indifferent
feeling. One can with joy alleviate someone's suffering.

At the moment of compassion there is calm. Compassion can be developed
as a meditation subject of samatha by those who have accumulations to
do so. The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (Chapter IX, 77-124) describes how
compassion as one of the divine abidings is to be developed as
meditation subject leading to the attainment of jhāna@footnote{With
compassion as meditation subject different stages of rūpa-jhāna can be
attained, but not the highest stage, since the jhānacittas of the
highest stage of rūpa-jhāna are accompanied by indifferent feeling.
Compassion can be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent
feeling and thus it is not the object of the jhānacittas of the
highest stage.}. Compassion is developed for the purpose of
purification from cruelty. When jhāna is attained compassion can be
extended to all beings, and then it has become unlimited. 

The Buddha who taught Dhamma out of compassion exhorted the monks to
be kind and compassionate to others. Compassion can and should be
developed in daily life. The Buddha himself visited the sick and asked
the monks to do likewise. They should attend to both the physical and
the mental needs of the sick. We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings}
(III, Book of the Fives, Chapter XIII, par 4) how one attends to the
sick in the wrong way and how in the right way:

@quotation

Monks, possessing five qualities one who waits on the sick is not fit
to help the sick. What five?

He cannot prepare medicaments; does not know physic from what is not
physic, offers what is not, does not offer what is; in hope of gain
waits on the sick, not from good-will; loathes to move excrement,
urine, puke and spittle; nor can he from time to time instruct, rouse,
gladden and satisfy the sick with Dhamma-talk. 

Monks, possessing these five qualities one who waits on the sick is
not fit to help the sick. 

(Possessing the opposite qualities he is fit to help.)

@end quotation

These words of the Buddha were motivated by his great compassion.
Whenever he visited the sick he would explain Dhamma to them@footnote{
For example in Kindred Sayings V, Mahā-vagga, Book XI, Kindred Sayings
on Streamwinning, par3, Dīghāvu.}. 

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (III, Book of the Fives, Chapter
XXIV, par 5, Taking Pity) that the Buddha explained to the monks about
different deeds of compassion towards householders:

@quotation

Monks, if a monk in residence follow the course of five things, he
takes pity on householders. What five?

He incites them to greater virtue; he makes them live in the mirror of
Dhamma; when visiting the sick, he stirs up mindfulness, saying: ``Let
the venerable ones set up mindfulness, that thing most worth while!'';
when many monks of the Order have come, he urges the householders to
do good@dots{}; and when they give him food, whether mean or choice,
he enjoys it by himself, nor frustrates (the effect of that) gift of
faith.

Verily, monks, @dots{}he takes pity on householders.

@end quotation

When householders give the monk a gift, no matter whether it is ``mean
or choice'', the monk should accept it out of compassion, in order to
help the householders to accumulate wholesomeness.

There are many ways of extending compassion to others. When we
understand that we should not hurt or harm others we may out of
compassion refrain from wrong speech and wrong action. We read in the
@emph{Middle Length Sayings} (I, no. 27, Lesser Discourse on the
Simile of the Elephant's Footprint) that the Buddha, while he was
staying at Sāvatthī, spoke about the monk who trains himself in order
to attain arahatship. The Buddha said about the observing of sīla:

He, being thus one who has gone forth and who is endowed with the
training and the way of living of monks, abandoning onslaught on
creatures, is one who abstains from onslaught on creatures; the stick
laid aside, the knife laid aside, he lives kindly, scrupulous,
friendly and compassionate towards all breathing things and
creatures@dots{}

The Buddha then spoke about the abstinence of the other kinds of
akusala kamma. If we see the benefit of compassion it is a condition
for developing it in daily life whenever there is an opportunity for
it. Sometimes there is an opportunity to alleviate physical suffering
and sometimes mental suffering. Someone may treat us in an unjust way
by speech or by actions, but, when we consider that he will receive
the results of his own deeds, compassion can arise instead of anger.
Understanding of kamma and vipāka can condition compassion.

It is the Buddha's greatest deed of compassion to teach Dhamma since
in this way beings' greatest suffering, their being in the cycle of
birth and death, can be overcome. It is due to the Buddha's great
compassion that we today can develop the way leading to the end of
suffering.

There are many degrees of compassion. It can arise without right
understanding or with right understanding. To the extent that right
understanding develops, all good qualities and thus also compassion
develop. Compassion can accompany the eight types of mahā-kusala
cittas, but it does not arise at all times with these cittas, since
there is not always opportunity for compassion. Compassion does not
accompany the mahā-vipākacittas, cittas which are results of kusala
kamma of the sense-sphere, because compassion has living beings as
object. Compassion can accompany the mahā-kiriyacittas of the arahat.

As regards rūpāvacara cittas, compassion can accompany the rūpāvacara
cittas of the first, second and third stage of jhāna of the fourfold
system (and the fourth stage of the fivefold system), but not those of
the highest stage of jhāna@footnote{Thus, compassion can accompany
twelve types of rūpāvacara cittas (Vis. XIV, 157, 181). See Appendix
8.}. 

Compassion does not accompany arūpāvacara cittas nor does it accompany
lokuttara cittas, since the object of lokuttara cittas is nibbāna. 

@emph{Sympathetic joy}, muditā, is the appreciation of someone else's
good fortune. We may think that sympathetic joy is pleasant feeling,
but muditā is not feeling. In order to understand its nature we should
study what the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IX, 95) states about muditā which
is here translated as gladness:

Gladness is characterized as gladdening (produced by others' success).
Its function resides in being unenvious. It is manifested as the
elimination of aversion (boredom). Its proximate cause is seeing
beings' success. It succeeds when it makes aversion (boredom) subside,
and it fails when it produces merriment.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part V, Chapter XIII, 193) gives a
similar definition. The function of sympathetic joy is being
unenvious. When others receive gifts or when they are praised envy
may arise. The proximate cause of both envy and sympathetic joy is the
same: someone else's good fortune. Jealousy arises with the akusala
citta which is rooted in aversion, dosa-mūla-citta. According to the
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (IX, 100) the far enemy of sympathetic joy is
aversion (boredom). If there is wise attention sympathetic joy can
arise instead of jealousy. The near enemy of sympathetic joy is ``joy
based on the homelife'' (Vis. IX, 100). This is joy connected with
the ``worldly life'' of clinging to pleasant sense objects. As we read
in the @emph{Visuddhimagga}, ``sympathetic joy fails when it produces
merriment'', that is, happiness connected with attachment. If there is
no right understanding which knows when the citta is kusala citta and
when it is akusala citta we may take for sympathetic joy what is
actually joy which is akusala. When we say to someone else: ``What a
beautiful garden you have'', there may be moments of sympathetic joy,
sincere approval of his good fortune, but there may also be moments
with attachment to pleasant objects. Akusala cittas and kusala cittas
arise at different moments. Since cittas arise and fall away very
rapidly it is hard to know their different characteristics but right
understanding of their characteristics can be developed. 

At the moment of sympathetic joy there is also calm with the kusala
citta. Those who have accumulations to develop calm can develop calm
with sympathetic joy as meditation subject. The @emph{Visuddhimagga}
(IX, 84-124) describes how the divine abiding of sympathetic joy can
be developed as a meditation subject of samatha leading to the
attainment of jhāna@footnote{With this subject different stages of
rūpa-jhāna can be attained, but not the highest stage. Sympathetic
joy can be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling.
It is not the subject of the jhānacittas of the highest stage which
are accompanied by indifferent feeling.}. It is developed for the
purpose of freedom from aversion. When jhāna is attained sympathetic
joy can be extended to an unlimited number of beings. We read about
the development of the four divine abidings in the @emph{Dīgha Nikāya}
(Dialogues of the Buddha III, no. 33, The Recital, 223, 224):

@quotation

Four ``infinitudes'' (appamaññas), to wit:---herein, monks, a monk
lets his mind pervade one quarter of the world with thoughts of
love@dots{}pity@dots{}sympathetic joy@dots{}equanimity, and so
the second quarter, and so the third, and so the fourth. And thus the
whole wide world, above, below, around and everywhere does he continue
to pervade with heart@dots{}far-reaching, grown great and beyond
measure, free from anger and ill-will.

@end quotation

Sympathetic joy can be developed in daily life. There are
opportunities for its development when we see someone else's good
fortune. If we see the disadvantages of jealousy there are conditions
for being appreciative when we see that someone is in good health, has
success in life and receives honour and praise. We read in the
@emph{Dīgha Nikāya} (Dialogues of the Buddha III, no. 31, Sigālovāda
Sutta) that the Buddha spoke words of advice to Sigāla which were to
be applied in daily life. He spoke to him about the characteristics of
bad friends and of good friends. As regards the friend who
sympathizes, he is to be reckoned as sound at heart on four grounds
(187, par 25):

@quotation
@dots{}He does not rejoice over your misfortunes; he rejoices over
your prosperity; he refrains anyone who is speaking ill of you; he
commends anyone who is praising you.

@end quotation

The good friend is not jealous but he rejoices in someone else's good
fortune. One can check oneself whether one really is a good friend to
someone else. If we are jealous we are not sincere in our friendship.

If we tend to be jealous it is difficult to cultivate sympathetic joy.
Since jealousy has been accumulated there are conditions for its
arising when we see that someone else receives praise or other
pleasant objects. It is useful to realize such moments of jealousy,
even when they are not coarse but more subtle. If right understanding
is being developed we will see that someone else's success does not
belong to a ``person'', that it is only vipāka which is conditioned by
kamma. Thus, jealousy is in fact groundless. When right understanding
sees that there are no people, no things which exist, only nāma and
rūpa which arise and fall away, there will gradually be less
conditions for jealousy. Envy is one of the ``lower fetters''
(saṁyojanas) which are eradicated by the sotāpanna. When there is no
more jealousy there are more conditions for sympathetic joy. It can
gradually become one's nature. The sotāpanna is the true friend who
sympathizes and is ``sound at heart on four grounds''. 

Sympathetic joy can arise with the eight types of mahā-kusala cittas.
It does not arise at all times with these types of citta since there
is not always an opportunity for it. Thus, sympathetic joy can
accompany the mahā-kusala cittas associated with pleasant feeling as
well as those associated with indifferent feeling. We should remember
that sympathetic joy is different from pleasant feeling. The
translation of muditā as sympathetic joy or gladness can mislead us.
One can be appreciative of someone's success also with indifferent
feeling.

Sympathetic joy does not accompany mahā-vipākacittas since it has
living beings as object (Vis. IV, 181). It can accompany
mahā-kiriyacittas. Also arahats extend sympathetic joy to living
beings. They have eradicated all akusala and good qualities have
reached perfection in them. Sympathetic joy can accompany
rūpa-jhānacittas@footnote{It can accompany the rūpāvacara cittas of
the first, second and third stage of jhāna of the fourfold system (and
the fourth stage of the five-fold system), but not those of the
highest stage. Thus, sympathetic joy can accompany twelve types of
rūpāvacara cittas in all (Vis. IX, 111, and XIV, 157,
182. See Appendix 8.}. Sympathetic joy does not accompany lokuttara
cittas since these have nibbāna as their object. 

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (V, Book of the Elevens, Chapter
II, par 5, Advantages) about the results of the development of the
divine abiding of loving kindness, but actually the other divine
abidings, namely compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity, lead to
the same benefits (Vis. IX, 83, 87, 90). These benefits are the
following:

@quotation

One sleeps happy and wakes happy; he sees no evil dream; he is dear to
human beings and non-human beings alike; the devas guard him; fire,
poison or sword affect him not; quickly he concentrates his mind; his
complexion is serene; he makes an end without bewilderment; and if he
has penetrated no further (to arahatship) he reaches (at death) the
Brahma-world@dots{}

@end quotation

We read in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (IX, 97) with regard to the four
``divine abidings'' that loving kindness is developed to ward off
ill-will, compassion to ward off cruelty, sympathetic joy to ward off
aversion and equanimity to ward off greed or resentment. However, we
should realize that defilements cannot be eradicated unless the true
nature of realities has been realized. All conditioned realities, even
the most excellent qualities, are impermanent, dukkha and anattā. We
read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (V, Book of the Elevens, Chapter
II, par 6, 345) about a monk who has developed the four divine
abidings:

@quotation

Then he thus ponders: This heart's release by amity@dots{}by
compassion@dots{}by sympathy@dots{}by equanimity is just a higher
product; it is produced by higher thought. Then he comes to know: Now
even that which is a higher product, produced by higher thought, is
impermanent, of a nature to end. Fixed on that idea he wins
destruction of the cankers; or if not that, yet by his passion for
dhamma, by his delight in dhamma, by utterly making and end of the
five fetters belonging to this world, he is reborn spontaneously, and
in that state passes utterly away, never to return (hither) from that
world.

@end quotation

@subsection Questions

@enumerate

@item
When someone else is hurt we tend to have unpleasant feeling. Can
there be compassion at the same time?

@item
By what kinds of feeling can compassion be accompanied?

@item
Can one extend loving kindness and compassion at the same time to
someone else?

@item
What is the proximate cause of sympathetic joy?

@item
Why is it said that the function of sympathetic joy is being
unenvious?

@item
Why are loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity
called the ``Illimitables''?
@end enumerate

@node Understanding 
@chapter Understanding 
`@section Understanding (paññā)
There are many kinds and degrees of understanding. There can be
understanding which is knowing the benefit of wholesomeness and the
disadvantages of unwholesomeness, there can be understanding which
stems from contemplation on the shortness of life. These kinds of
understanding can arise even when one has not listened to the Dhamma.
When one has studied the Dhamma there can be intellectual
understanding about ultimate realities, about kamma and vipāka, about
nāmas and rūpas which can be experienced through six doors, and, when
understanding develops further there can be direct understanding of
ultimate realities, of nāma and rūpa. Direct understanding of
realities can develop to the highest wisdom which eradicates all
defilements.

Understanding, paññā or amoha, is among the six sobhana cetasikas
which do not accompany each sobhana citta. It is one of the three
beautiful roots, sobhana hetus. The two sobhana hetus which are
non-attachment, alobha, and non-aversion, adosa, accompany each
sobhana citta, but understanding does not. Whenever we perform deeds
of generosity or observe morality understanding may or may not
accompany the kusala citta. But when we apply ourselves to mental
development, bhāvanā, which comprises studying the teachings and
explaining them to others, the development of samatha and the
development of vipassanā, understanding has to accompany the kusala
citta.

When understanding accompanies the mahā-kusala citta (kusala citta of
the sense-sphere) which performs deeds of generosity or observes
morality, it may be of the level of intellectual understanding:
understanding of the benefit of good deeds and the disadvantages of
bad deeds, understanding of kamma and vipāka. However, when we perform
deeds of generosity or observe morality, there can also be the
development of direct understanding of realities. 

As regards mental development, one cannot apply oneself with success
to this way of kusala without understanding. Also those who do not
know the Buddha's teachings may reflect wisely on the truth that all
things in life are susceptible to change and that they do not last,
and they may develop calm. There were wise people also before the
Buddha's time who understood the characteristic of true calm which is
wholesome. Those who understood the characteristic of calm and did not
mistakenly think that clinging to quietness was calm, could develop
calm with a meditation subject and in this way attain higher degrees
of calm. Those who saw the disadvantages of sense-impressions
developed jhāna in order to be free of them. Those who saw the
disadvantages of rūpa-jhāna, fine-material jhāna, which still has
meditation subjects depending on materiality, developed arūpa-jhāna,
immaterial jhāna. The person who had become very skilful in jhāna
could develop ``supernormal powers'', abhiññās, such as magical
powers, remembrance of former lives and the ``Divine Eye'', knowledge
of the passing away and rebirth of beings. The cittas which develop
such powers are accompanied by understanding, but even this kind of
understanding cannot eradicate defilements. 

The understanding which realizes the true nature of realities can
eradicate defilements and its development can only be taught by a
Buddha. This kind of understanding does not arise automatically, it
has to be developed. When one has listened to the Dhamma and reflected
on it, there can first be intellectual understanding of realities. If
there is mindfulness of nāma and rūpa when they appear in daily life
direct understanding of realities can gradually be developed.
Eventually the true nature of realities can be penetrated and
defilements can be eradicated at the attainment of
enlightenment@footnote{Intellectual understanding is in Pāli:
pariyatti. The development of direct understanding or the ``practice''
is in Pāli: patipatti. The penetration of the truth is in Pāli:
pativedha.}. 

Seeing realities as they are is the goal of the Buddha's teachings.
Understanding should know what is real in the ultimate sense and what
is not real. So long as there is wrong view we cannot see things as
they are. People, animals and houses are not real in the ultimate
sense, they are only objects of thought. Nāma and rūpa are real in the
ultimate sense, they have their own characteristics which can be
directly experienced when they appear one at a time, through one of
the six doors. We can verify the truth of the Buddha's teachings in
being mindful of realities and developing understanding of them. Then
we will be able to find out whether realities are permanent or
impermanent, whether there is a person or self who can control
realities or not.

Each reality has its own specific characteristic by which it can be
distinguished from another reality (distinctive mark or visesa
lakkhaṇa). Seeing, hearing, hardness or sound have each their own
characteristic. However, there are also three general characteristics
common to all conditioned realities (samañña lakkhaṇa) and these are:
impermanence, dukkha or unsatisfactoriness, and anattā, non-self. When
understanding has been developed it can eventually know realities as
impermanent, dukkha and anattā. There cannot, in the beginning, be
clear understanding of the true nature of realities. Understanding
develops gradually in different stages. 

Direct understanding of realities is, as we have seen, different from
thinking about them. Direct understanding can only be developed by
being mindful of the nāma or rūpa appearing at the present moment.
When there is mindfulness of one reality at a time understanding can
investigate its characteristic and in that way it can gradually
develop. When, for example, hardness appears there can be mindfulness
of its characteristic and there is at that moment no thinking of a
thing which is hard or of the place on our body where hardness
impinges. If we think of the place of its impingement, such as a hand
or a leg, there is an idea of ``my body'' to which we tend to cling.
By being aware of one reality at a time we will learn that in the
ultimate sense the body as a ``whole'' does not exist, that there are
only different elements which arise and then fall away.

For the development of direct understanding of realities it is not
enough to know only the specific characteristics of realities, the
characteristics by which they are distinguished from one another.
Understanding has to be developed stage by stage, so that it will be
able to penetrate the three general characteristics of conditioned
realities: the characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and non-self. 

When we are absorbed in concepts and there is no mindfulness, we live
as in a dream and we do not know what is really there: only
ever-changing nāmas and rūpas. We read in the @emph{Middle Length
Sayings} (II, no. 54, Discourse to Potaliya) that the Buddha pointed
out in different similes the dangers and disadvantages of sense
pleasures. One of these similes is the following:

And, householder, it is as if a man might see in a dream delightful
parks, delightful woods, delightful stretches of level ground and
delightful lakes; but on waking up could see nothing. Even so,
householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus: ``Pleasures of the
senses have been likened by the Lord to a dream, of much pain, of much
tribulation, wherein is more peril.'' And having seen this thus as it
really is by means of perfect wisdom@dots{}the material things of
the world are stopped entirely.

We cannot really see parks, woods and lakes, because what is
experienced through the eyes is only the rūpa which is visible object.
We can think of the concepts of parks, woods and lakes, and the
thinking is conditioned by remembrance of past experiences. When we do
not develop understanding of the reality which appears through one of
the six doors and only pay attention to ``wholes'' such as gardens or
houses, we believe that we can possess them. When there is mindfulness
of one object at a time, such as visible object or hardness, we will
understand that in the ultimate sense we cannot own anything. We
cannot possess visible object, it can only be seen. We cannot take it
with us; it arises just for a moment and then it falls away. We cannot
possess hardness, it can be experienced through touch and then it
falls away immediately. The development of insight will lead to
detachment, it will lead to the eradication of the idea of a self who
can exert control over things or events. 

When we learn that seeing only sees visible object we may have doubts
about the characteristic of seeing. It seems that there is all the
time paying attention to the shape and form of things or noticing the
dimensions of things. This is thinking, not seeing, the experience of
what appears through eyes. If there were no thinking one could not
observe shape and form or dimensions of things. But such moments of
thinking are conditioned by seeing, by the experience of what appears
through the eyes. There are also moments of just seeing, moments that
we are not paying attention to details or focusing on a ``thing''. It
is the same when we read a book. It seems that there are only moments
of paying attention to the shape of the letters and their meaning, but
there must also in between be moments of experiencing visible object,
otherwise we could not read. Before we studied the Dhamma we never
considered what seeing is, but if we learn to be mindful of one
reality at a time understanding will know realities as they are. There
is time and again thinking of concepts and then the reality of
thinking can be object of mindfulness so that it will be known as
non-self. Gradually we can learn to be mindful of seeing, visible
object, hearing, sound and all the other realities which appear
through six doors in our daily life. 

Understanding is one of the wholesome faculties (indriyas), called the
``spiritual faculties'', which has to be developed together with the
other ``spiritual faculties'' of confidence, energy, mindfulness and
concentration. Through the development of these faculties the four
noble Truths can be realized.

Understanding is a controlling faculty, an indriya, in the sense of
predominance since it overcomes ignorance (@emph{Atthasālinī} I, Book
I, Part IV, Chapter I, 122)@footnote{See also Dhammasangaṇi (Book I,
Chapter I, par16) which describes understanding among others as
``searching the Dhamma'', that is: the four noble Truths, as a
``guide'', as a ``sword'' which cuts off defilements, as a ``light'',
as ``glory'' or ``splendour''.}. It exercises government over the
associated dhammas (the citta and cetasikas it accompanies) by the
characteristic of vision, that is, the realization of the three
characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and anattā. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} states further on (in the same section) that
understanding has as characteristic illuminating and
understanding. It states (123) that just as a clever surgeon knows
which food is suitable and which is not, understanding knows states as
``moral or immoral, serviceable or unserviceable, low or exalted,
black or pure@dots{}'' Understanding which has been developed knows
the four noble Truths. 

The @emph{Atthasālinī} then gives another definition of understanding:

@quotation

Understanding has the penetration of intrinsic nature, unfaltering
penetration as its characteristic, like the penetration of an arrow
shot by a skilled archer; illumination of the object as its function,
as it were a lamp; non-perplexity as its proximate cause, as it were a
good guide in the forest. 

@end quotation

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (Chapter XIV, 143) gives a similar
definition.

Understanding is also a ``power'' (bala), because it does not
vacillate through ignorance (@emph{Atthasālinī}, I, Book I, Part IV,
Chapter II, 148). As we have seen, when the wholesome faculties have
been developed they become powers which are unshakable. They cannot be
shaken by their opposites.

Right understanding of realities, sammā-diṭṭhi, is a @emph{factor of
the Eightfold Path} which has to be developed together with the other
factors of the eightfold Path so that it can penetrate the four noble
Truths. The object of right understanding which is not lokuttara,
supramundane, but ``lokiya'', mundane, is the nāma or rūpa appearing
at the present moment. The object of right understanding which is
lokuttara is nibbāna. Right understanding which accompanies the
lokuttara magga-citta eradicates defilements; defilements are
eradicated at different stages of enlightenment and all of them are
eradicated at the attainment of arahatship.

Understanding is classified in several ways and thus its different
aspects can be seen. It has been classified as one of the seven
@emph{factors of enlightenment} (sambojjhangas) and as such it is
called @emph{investigation of dhamma} , dhamma vicaya. The factors of
enlightenment are mindfulness, investigation of dhamma, energy,
enthusiasm, calm, concentration and equanimity. These factors have to
be developed together for the purpose of attaining enlightenment.
There has to be ``investigation'' of the reality, the dhamma,
appearing at the present moment, over and over again before
enlightenment can be attained and defilements eradicated.

Understanding which is supramundane, lokuttara, can be classified by
way of three faculties:
@enumerate

@item
I-shall-come-to-know-the-unknown'' faculty(an-aññātaññassāmī
't'indriya), arising at the moment of the magga-citta of the
sotāpanna@footnote{Dhammasangaṇi, par362-364. Vis. XVI, 3.}.

@item
The faculty of final knowledge (aññindriya), which arises at the
moment of the phala-citta, fruition-consciousness, of the sotāpanna,
and also accompanies the magga-citta and the phala-citta of the
sakadāgāmī and of the anāgāmī and the magga-citta of the
arahat@footnote{Dhammasangaṇi, par505.}. 

@item
The final knower faculty (aññātāvindriya), arising at the moment of
the phala-citta of the arahat.
@end enumerate

The sotāpanna still has to develop right understanding of nāma and
rūpa because his understanding has not reached the degree that all
defilements can be eradicated. The task of developing understanding is
finished only when the ``final knower faculty'' has
arisen@footnote{Dhammasangaṇi, par553.}. 

When we learn about the different classifications of understanding we
can be reminded that understanding has to be @emph{developed} in order
to reach higher stages. It should be developed in whatever situation
in our daily life we may be. We are inclined to think that awareness
of the present moment is too difficult, but that one day in the future
we may reach the goal. If we think that the present situation is not
favourable for the development of right understanding, it will not
develop. We should remember that each moment is in fact a new
situation which is conditioned and which is beyond control, and that
it is therefore useless to prefer another situation to the present
one. We should not worry about the situation we are in but we should
be mindful of whatever reality appears. There is for example time and
again heat or cold. Usually we think of a concept of ``I am hot'' or
``I am cold'', but heat and cold are only rūpa-elements and they can
be objects of mindfulness when they appear. There is no self who
experiences heat or cold, it is nāma which arises because of
conditions. Through the development of understanding one will be less
inclined to cling to a concept of ``I feel'' or ``I experience''. It
is only a type of nāma which experiences something, a nāma which has
arisen and then falls away immediately. There can be a beginning of
understanding when there is mindfulness of what has already arisen at
this moment because of its appropriate conditions.

@subsection Questions
@enumerate
@item
Why can there only be direct understanding of realities when there is
mindfulness of them?

@item
Understanding is an indriya, a controlling faculty. What does it
control?

@item
What is the object of right understanding of the eightfold Path which
is mundane, not supramundane, lokuttara?

@item
We may find a particular situation too difficult, not favourable for
the development of understanding. What should we do when we are in
such a situation?
@end enumerate

@node The Stages of Insight
@chapter The Stages of Insight

The realities which appear in our daily life are impermanent, dukkha
and anattā. We may have theoretical understanding of these three
characteristics of realities, but does understanding directly know the
truth? There may not be understanding which directly knows the arising
and falling away of seeing which appears now or of visible object
which appears now. We learn about ``arising and falling away of
realities'', but instead of directly knowing the truth we can only
think of the truth. The realization of the impermanence of realities
is not thinking, ``It does not last''. The impermanence of realities
cannot be realized in the beginning of the development of
understanding. First understanding should clearly know the nāma
which appears as nāma and the rūpa which appears as rūpa. Nāma and
rūpa are different realities and they can only be object of
mindfulness one at a time, but we are still likely to confuse their
characteristics. In theory we know that nāma experiences an object and
that rūpa does not experience anything, but theoretical understanding
is only superficial. In order to develop direct understanding of
realities we should first know the difference between the moments that
there is thinking about concepts such as a person, body or house, and
the moments that there is mindfulness of only one reality at a time,
such as visible object, hardness or seeing. These are ultimate
realities, each with their own characteristic, which does not change,
no matter how we name it. One reality at a time impinges on one of the
six doors and when mindfulness arises it can be directly aware of that
object, and at that moment understanding can investigate its nature.
In this way understanding of realities can develop. 

The realization of the truth of impermanence, dukkha and anattā does
not occur all of a sudden, it is the result of the development of
direct understanding in different stages. All through the different
stages of development of understanding the object is the same: nāma
and rūpa which appear at the present moment, in daily life. The object
is the same but understanding develops and sees realities more
clearly. Thus doubt about realities and the wrong view of them are
eliminated.

The first stage of insight, which is only a beginning stage, is the
understanding of the difference between the characteristic of nāma and
the characteristic of rūpa, not merely in theory but through direct
understanding of them when they appear. The first stage of insight is
called @emph{Defining of nāma and rūpa}, or ``Delimitation of
Formations'' (in Pāli: nāma-rūpa-pariccheda-ñāṇa). The following
stages of insight, which are higher stages, cannot be realized before
the first stage of insight. Thus, the impermanence of, for example,
seeing cannot be realized if there is no clear understanding first of
the characteristic of seeing as nāma, different from rūpa. We know in
theory that seeing does not stay, that it must have fallen away when
there is thinking of a concept, but this does not mean that the
arising and falling away of seeing at this moment is directly known.
Seeing and visible object may still seem to appear together, and then
there is no mindfulness of one reality at a time but only thinking
about seeing and visible object. 

The understanding of seeing and all the other realities is bound to be
vague in the beginning and it is useful to know what one does not
understand yet. Seeing arises and then it falls away immediately to be
succeeded by other cittas of the eye-door process which experience
visible object. When the eye-door process has been completed there is
a process of cittas which experience visible object through the
mind-door; they do not experience a concept but visible object which
has only just fallen away. Later on other mind-door processes of
cittas which experience a concept may arise. When one pays attention
to the shape and form of something and to the details, the object is a
concept. Thus, rūpas which impinge on the five senses are experienced
through the corresponding sense-door as well as through the mind-door.
We are confused with regard to the truth because it seems that seeing
continues for some time and that there is no mind-door process of
cittas which also experience the visible object which was experienced
by the cittas of the eye-door process. We do not notice the mind-door
processes which arise in between the sense-door processes, it seems
that the mind-door processes are covered up by the sense-door
processes. 

When the first stage of insight is reached, paññā which arises in a
mind-door process clearly distinguishes the characteristic of nāma
from the characteristic of rūpa, there is no confusion about their
different characteristics. Neither is there confusion about what the
mind-door process is; the mind-door process which follows upon a
sense-door process is no longer covered up, as was the case before the
first stage of insight occurred. At the moments of insight nāma and
rūpa appear one at a time in mind-door processes and at these moments
one does not take realities as a ``whole'', there is no idea of ``the
world'', no idea of a self. There is no self who can direct which
nāma and rūpa are the objects of insight, there is no particular order
of their appearing. Any nāma and any rūpa can be the object of
insight and their different characteristics can be distinguished from
each other. 

When the moments of insight knowledge, vipassanā ñāṇa, have fallen
away it seems again that realities appear as a ``whole'', as the
world. Understanding is still weak. It depends on the accumulated
wisdom of the individual which kinds of nāma and rūpa have been
penetrated by insight, it may have been only a few kinds. The
understanding which was gained at the moments of vipassanā ñāṇa has to
be applied again and again and one has to continue to be mindful of
all kinds of nāma and rūpa which appear. The concept of self is so
deeply rooted that it cannot be eradicated at the first stage of
insight. Understanding has to develop further in order to eradicate
it.

When the characteristic of nāma and the characteristic of rūpa can be
distinguished from each other, nāma and rūpa can be seen more clearly
as conditioned realities. Seeing arises, no matter we like it or not,
because there are conditions for its arising. Visible object
conditions seeing by being its object. If there were no object, seeing
could not arise. Seeing is also conditioned by eyesense which is its
physical base, a kind of rūpa produced by kamma. If kamma does not
produce eyesense there cannot be seeing. Seeing is vipākacitta, the
result of kamma. There is seeing of pleasant objects and of unpleasant
objects and nobody can cause the experience of objects to be pleasant.
Contact, phassa, is another condition for seeing. Contact is a
cetasika which arises with each citta and it ``contacts'' the object
so that citta can experience it. If there were no contact there could
not be seeing. There is no self who sees and can control the seeing;
it is only a conditioned nāma which arises for a moment and then falls
away. 

Each reality which arises is conditioned by different factors. The
seventh book of the ``Abhidhamma'', the ``Book of Conditional
Relations'' (Paṭṭhāna)@footnote{Translated by Ven. U. Narada, P.T.S.
1969. See also his Guide to Conditional Relations, P.T.S. 1979.}
deals with twenty four different types of conditions (paccayas).
When we study these we should keep in mind that they occur in daily
life. When paññā has been developed more by being mindful of all kinds
of realities appearing in daily life, the second stage of insight can
be realized. This is @emph{Discerning the Conditions of Nāma and Rūpa}
(in Pāli: paccaya-pariggaha-ñāṇa). This is not theoretical
understanding of conditions, it is not thinking of all the different
conditioning factors for the arising of nāma and rūpa, but it is the
direct understanding of nāma and rūpa as conditioned realities.
Through direct understanding of the nāma or the rūpa which appears now
we will come to understand what our life is and how it is conditioned. 

Just as nāma and rūpa which arise at the present moment are
conditioned, so they were in the past and so they will be in the
future. We have to continue to be born and to receive results of kamma
because there is still ignorance and craving and these condition
rebirth. There is clinging to the objects which can be experienced
through the senses, there is clinging to life. The clinging which
arises today is conditioned by clinging which arose in the past and
which has been accumulated and carried on from one life to the next
life. 

We may still doubt whether there is rebirth after the
dying-consciousness. If the citta at this moment is clearly understood
as a conditioned reality there will also be more understanding about
death and rebirth. Each citta which arises now is succeeded by the
next one. This also happens at the last moment of our life: the
dying-consciousness has to be succeeded by the rebirth-consciousness
which is the first citta of the next life. So long as there are
conditions for it there will be the arising of nāma and rūpa again and
again. Doubts about past life, present life and future life cannot be
overcome by theoretical understanding of the conditions for the
arising of nāma and rūpa, it can only be overcome by the direct
understanding of realities and their conditions. 

Life exists in only one moment of experiencing an object. This moment
falls away and is gone completely, and then another moment arises.
When there is seeing, our life is seeing, when there is hearing, our
life is hearing. Each moment of life is impermanent and thus it is
dukkha, we cannot take our refuge in it. The cause of dukkha is
clinging. Very often after seeing, hearing or the other
sense-cognitions there is clinging, but it may be so subtle that we do
not notice it. We cling to seeing, we also cling to thinking of
concepts after the seeing, we want to pay attention to shape and form.
When we read there is usually clinging, we have desire to know the
meaning of what we read. When we are thinking there are often akusala
cittas with clinging, but we do not notice it. When right
understanding is being developed clinging can be known as only a
conditioned nāma, not self.

We read in the @emph{Kindred Sayings} (II, Nidāna-vagga, Part XII,
Chapter V, par 43, Ill) that the Buddha, while he was at Sāvatthī,
spoke about the arising of Ill, dukkha, and its cause, and about the
ceasing of dukkha and the conditions for its ceasing:

@quotation
@dots{}What, monks, is the arising of dukkha?

Because of sight and visual objects visual consciousness arises,
contact is the clash of the three; feeling is conditioned by contact,
craving by the feeling. This, monks, is the arising of dukkha.

(We then read the same with regard to the other doorways.)

And what, monks, is the passing away of dukkha?

Because of sight and visible objects visual consciousness arises;
contact is the clash of the three; feeling is conditioned by the
contact, craving by the feeling. By the utter fading away and ceasing
of the craving, grasping ceases, by the ceasing of the grasping,
becoming ceases, by the ceasing of becoming, birth ceases, by the
ceasing of birth, decay-and-death, grief, lamentation, suffering,
despair cease. Such is the ceasing of this entire mass of dukkha. 

(The same is said with regard to the other doorways.)

This, monks, is the passing away of dukkha.

@end quotation

We may read this sutta with theoretical understanding of realities,
but only through insight, through direct understanding of the truth,
can we grasp the deep meaning of this sutta. There are many degrees of
knowing the three characteristics of conditioned realities, of
impermanence, dukkha and anattā. After the second stage of insight has
been reached, understanding investigates more and more these three
characteristics. The third stage of insight is @emph{Investigation
Knowledge or Comprehension by Groups} (in Pāli: sammasana ñāṇa, Vis.
XX, 6). It may seem that investigation knowledge is merely
intellectual understanding, but it is a stage of direct understanding,
of insight. At this stage paññā clearly realizes the succession of
the nāmas and of the rūpas as they arise and fall away very rapidly. 

Even after the third stage of insight has been reached, insight is
still ``tender insight'' (taruṇa vipassanā). When insight is merely
``tender'' a person can still deviate from the eightfold Path. The
@emph{Visuddhimagga} (XX, 105) mentions ``imperfections'' which can
arise: someone may cling to his understanding, to tranquillity or to
the assurance he has due to this beginning insight. He may forget that
also understanding is only a conditioned reality which is not self. Or
he may erroneously think that he has attained enlightenment already
and thus he may get stuck in his development. 

The imperfections of insight can only be overcome by continuing to be
mindful of all kinds of realities which appear. If one realizes that
also insight knowledge is only a conditioned nāma there will be less
clinging to it. There is no self who can induce the arising of the
stages of insight nor exert control over them. Those who are no longer
deluded because of the imperfections of insight, know what is the
right path and what is not the right path (Vis. XX, 129). If one does
not deviate from the right path anymore insight can develop and then a
following stage of insight can be reached. This is the first stage of
``principal insight'' (mahā-vipassanā), namely, the @emph{Knowledge of
the Arising and Falling away of Nāma and Rūpa} (udayabbhayā ñāṇa). As
we have seen, at the third stage of ``tender insight'' paññā realizes
the succession of nāmas and rūpas which arise and fall away very
rapidly. However, at this stage paññā is not keen enough yet to see
the danger and disadvantage of the arising and falling away of
realities. At the first stage of principal insight paññā realizes more
clearly and more precisely the arising and the falling away of a nāma
and a rūpa as it appears one at a time, and there can be more
detachment from them. Although realities are more clearly understood
at each subsequent stage of insight, the knowledge which was gained
has to be applied and one has to continue to be mindful of nāma and
rūpa. Only thus the three characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and
anattā will be penetrated more deeply.

There are nine stages of principal insight, mahā-vipassanā, in all
according to the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (XXI, 1)@footnote{For details
see Appendix 9. The way of counting of the stages of insight may vary
depending on whether the counting starts at the first stage of
principal insight or at the third stage of tender insight, and whether
paññā arising in the process during which enlightenment occurs, paññā
accompanying the lokuttara cittas and paññā which ``reviews'' after
that process is over, is included or not.}. In the course of the
development of insight there will be more detachment from realities.
Wrong views are more and more abandoned and there comes to be a
clearer understanding of the fact that conditioned dhammas cannot be
true happiness since they are liable to destruction and fall. The
following stage of insight, the second stage of ``principal insight''
is @emph{Knowledge of Dissolution} (in Pāli: bhanga ñāṇa). In order to
be able to reach this stage paññā has to investigate thoroughly all
the different kinds of realities appearing through the six doors.
There must be mindfulness of whatever reality appears in whatever
situation one may be. At this stage paññā pays more close attention to
the falling away of realities and sees more clearly that they are no
refuge. There is a beginning of detachment from the concept of self.
The following stage of insight is @emph{Knowledge of Terror} (in Pāli:
bhaya ñāṇa). This is not fear which is akusala, it is insight which
sees more clearly the danger of all conditioned dhammas which are
bound to cease. Each following stage of insight marks a growing
understanding of the disadvantages of nāma and rūpa, of conditioned
realities, since their true characteristics are seen more clearly. At
the moment a stage of insight knowledge arises there is no clinging to
nāma and rūpa, but such moments fall away and then there tends to be
clinging again. One has to continue being mindful of realities and
develop understanding of them until arahatship has been attained. As
paññā becomes keener it becomes detached from conditioned realities
and it wants to be delivered from them. It sees that conditioned
realities are meaningless, void, and that they have no owner, that
there is no self who can control them. Understanding brings about more
dispassion and equanimity towards conditioned dhammas, although
clinging has not been eradicated. When understanding clearly sees the
disadvantages of conditioned dhammas, and it has been developed to the
degree that enlightenment can be attained, then the stage of insight
which is @emph{Adaptation Knowledge} (in Pāli: anuloma ñāṇa) can be
reached, and this arises during the process in which enlightenment
occurs. This process is as follows@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily
Life, Chapter 24.}: 
@itemize 

@item
mind-door adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta)

@item
preparatory consciousness (parikamma)

@item
proximity consciousness or access (upacāra)

@item
adaptation or conformity (anuloma)

@item
change of lineage (gotrabhū)

@item
path-consciousness (magga-citta)

@item
fruition-consciousness (phala-citta, two or three moments, 
depending on the individual) 
@end itemize

The mind-door adverting-consciousness of this process adverts to one
of the three characteristics of the reality which presents itself. The
preparatory consciousness, the proximity consciousness and the
adaptation which are mahā-kusala cittas accompanied by understanding
experience the same object as the mind-door adverting-consciousness.
``Adaptation'' (anuloma) is the last citta in that process which has
as object a conditioned reality and penetrates its true nature. The
succeeding citta which is called ``change of lineage'' (gotrabhū) does
not experience the same object anymore as the preceding cittas in that
process; it is the first citta experiencing nibbāna (Vis. XXII, 1).
It experiences nibbāna but it is not lokuttara citta, it is
mahā-kusala citta. Change of lineage is intermediate between cittas of
the sense-sphere and the lokuttara cittas which succeed it. 

Only one of the three characteristics of reality is penetrated by
paññā accompanying the mahā-kusala cittas before the ``change of
lineage'' arises; thus, the reality which appears is either seen as
impermanent, or as dukkha or as anattā. In the development of insight
understanding investigates the three characteristics, but it depends
on the individual's accumulations which of these three is realized
more often. There can be thinking of the three characteristics, but
when insight develops and different stages of insight have arisen, the
three characteristics are seen more clearly by direct understanding. 

At the moment of enlightenment the enlightenment factors accompany the
lokuttara citta. As we have seen, these are: mindfulness,
investigation of dhamma (which is paññā), energy, enthusiasm,
tranquillity, concentration and equanimity. The magga-citta eradicates
defilements and experiences nibbāna. The phala-citta which is the
result of the magga-citta also experiences nibbāna; it does not
eradicate defilements@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily Life, Chapter
24.}. 

It is useful to learn about the different stages of insight. It
reminds us that we have only a limited understanding of realities, but
this should not discourage us. The only way to develop insight is to
begin at this moment to be mindful of whatever reality appears. We
cannot expect the arising of insight-knowledge soon, not even during
this life. We have to continue to be mindful of nāma and rūpa and
develop understanding of them. Only when understanding has been
developed it can distinguish the characteristic of nāma from the
characteristic of rūpa. Throughout the development of insight the
objects of understanding are nāma and rūpa and one has to continue
being mindful of them. Even when the stage of the sotāpanna has been
realized one has to continue developing insight. The sotāpanna has
realized the four noble Truths, but there are many degrees of
realizing them. Only when paññā has been developed to the degree that
arahatship is attained, it has reached completion and then all
defilements are eradicated. 

As we have seen, there are many kinds and degrees of understanding:
intellectual understanding of realities, direct understanding of them,
developed in different stages of insight, understanding of the plane
of rūpāvacara citta (fine-material jhāna) and of the plane of
arūpāvacara citta (immaterial jhāna), and understanding which is
lokuttara paññā.

As regards kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the sense-sphere, which are
accompanied by understanding, there are four of the eight types of
mahā-kusala cittas, four of the eight types of mahā-vipākacittas and
four of the eight types of mahā-kiriyacittas which are accompanied by
understanding@footnote{See the summary in Appendix 8.}. If someone
is born with mahā-vipākacitta accompanied by understanding he may, if
he intends to develop higher degrees of calm, be able to attain jhāna
in that life. If someone develops insight he may attain enlightenment
in that life. If someone is not born with mahā-vipākacitta accompanied
by understanding he can still develop calm or insight, but he cannot
attain jhāna or enlightenment in that life. As regards the
mahā-kiriyacittas of the arahat, four of the eight types are, as we
have seen, accompanied by understanding. The arahat can have
mahā-kiriyacittas which are not accompanied by understanding, for
example at the moments when he does not preach Dhamma. 

All rūpāvacara cittas and all arūpāvacara cittas have to be
accompanied by understanding. Without paññā jhāna cannot be attained. 

As regards lokuttara citta, the magga-cittas and the phala-cittas of
the four stages of enlightenment are accompanied by understanding
which is lokuttara paññā. When lokuttara cittas accompanied by
jhāna-factors of the different stages of jhāna are not taken into
account, there are eight lokuttara cittas accompanied by lokuttara
paññā. 

When lokuttara cittas accompanied by jhāna-factors of the five stages
of jhāna are taken into account, there are forty lokuttara cittas
(five times eight) instead of eight@footnote{See Abhidhamma in Daily
Life, Chapter 23.} which are accompanied by lokuttara paññā. The fact
that lokuttara cittas can be counted as eight or forty shows us that
accumulations of different ariyans are not the same. They all have
eradicated the same kinds of defilements at the subsequent stages of
enlightenment, but they have accumulated different inclinations and
skills. Some had the ability to develop insight as well as calm to the
degree of jhāna and could attain different stages of jhāna, others did
not have such skill. 

Some types of sobhana cittas are accompanied by understanding, others
are not. Understanding is a cetasika, not self, and it arises only
when there are the right conditions for its arising. We may find it
difficult to grasp how the understanding of the reality appearing at
the present moment can develop to the degree that it leads to the
eradication of defilements. When someone merely begins to develop
understanding he may sometimes have doubts about the benefit of
mindfulness of visible object, seeing, sound or hearing which appears
now. We should remember that when there is less ignorance of realities
there will be less defilements. Ignorance is the root of all that is
unwholesome. When there is ignorance we do not know the benefit of
kusala and the danger of akusala, we do not know realities as they
are. Ignorance conditions wrong view. It is wrong view to take
realities for self or to believe that they last. When understanding
begins to develop we cannot expect a radical change in our behaviour.
We are still selfish, we still cling to the objects we experience, we
are still angry, jealous and stingy. We have to be sincere with
ourselves when we develop understanding, we should not pretend to be
without defilements. Defilements are bound to arise, but we can begin
to understand that whatever reality presents itself has arisen because
of its appropriate conditions and is not self. We cannot eradicate
defilements merely by doing good deeds without developing
understanding of realities. Seeing realities as they are is the only
way that eventually defilements can be eradicated.

We read in the @emph{Gradual Sayings} (Book of the Tens, Chapter III,
par 3, With Body@footnote{I am using the translation by Ven.
Nyanaponika, in The Roots of Good and Evil, p. 55, Wheel 251/ 253,
B.P.S. Kandy, 1978.}) that wrong bodily action can be abandoned by
right bodily action and wrong speech by right speech. However, the
three unwholesome roots of lobha, dosa and moha can only be eradicated
by understanding. The text states:

@quotation

Which are the things, O monks, that can neither be abandoned by bodily
acts nor by speech, but can be abandoned by wisely seeing them? Greed
can neither be abandoned by bodily acts nor by speech; but it can be
abandoned by wisely seeing it. Hatred can neither be abandoned by
bodily acts nor by speech; but it can be abandoned by wisely seeing
it. Delusion can neither be abandoned by bodily acts nor by speech;
but it can be abandoned by wisely seeing it.

@end quotation

Attachment, aversion and ignorance are realities, they arise. They can
be object of mindfulness so that understanding can investigate them
and see them as they are, as not self. If we avoid being mindful of
akusala, it cannot be seen as it is and then it cannot be eradicated.
At this moment enlightenment seems far off, but we should not forget
that understanding begins by listening, memorizing and considering
what one has heard. Considering the nāma and rūpa which appear can
condition mindfulness so that there can gradually be direct
understanding of realities. Understanding which arises now is
conditioned by many moments of studying and considering in the past.
It arises and then falls away, but it is never lost since the
conditions are accumulated for the arising again of understanding and
thus it can grow. Understanding which is lokuttara is completely
different from past moments of ``mundane'' understanding, yet it is
conditioned by past moments of insight and also by other good
qualities, such as generosity, patience and perseverance, which have
been developed together with understanding. Such good qualities
should not be neglected, they can be helpful conditions leading to
detachment. Understanding develops gradually in the course of many
lives and therefore we should persevere in considering the Dhamma in
daily life and in being mindful of realities.

@subsection Questions
@enumerate

@item
Why can the arising and falling away of nāma and rūpa not be realized
before the difference between nāma and rūpa has been clearly seen?

@item
Through which doorway can insight knowledge realize seeing as it is? 

@item
Can there be clinging when we perceive a teacup?

@item
When is there thinking with akusala citta?

@item
What is the object of understanding all through the development of
the different stages of insight? 

@item
Can aversion be the object of insight in the process of cittas during
which enlightenment is attained?
@end enumerate

@node Wholesome Deeds
@chapter Wholesome Deeds

As we have seen, nineteen sobhana cetasikas accompany each sobhana
citta. In order to perform wholesome deeds the kusala citta needs the
assistance of at least these nineteen cetasikas. It needs confidence
in kusala, mindfulness which is non-forgetful of kusala, shame which
shrinks from akusala and fear of blame which fears its consequences.
Each kusala citta has to be rooted in the two beautiful roots, sobhana
hetus, of non-attachment, alobha, and non-aversion, adosa. Moreover,
there has to be equanimity or mental balance, there has to be calm of
cetasikas and calm of citta. There have to be the other ``pairs'' of
mental lightness, pliancy, workableness, proficiency and uprightness,
so that there is suppleness and proficiency in the performing of good
deeds@footnote{For the ``Six Pairs'' see Chapter 31.}. In addition to
the nineteen sobhana cetasikas which accompany each sobhana citta,
there are, as we have seen, six other sobhana cetasikas which do not
accompany each sobhana citta. These are the three abstinences of right
speech, right action and right livelihood, compassion, sympathetic joy
and understanding. Thus, there are twenty-six sobhana cetasikas in
all. The three abstinences, compassion and sympathetic joy arise when
there is an opportunity for them. Understanding does not accompany
each sobhana citta, but for mental development, which includes samatha
and vipassanā, understanding is indispensable. Each sobhana cetasika
has its own function to perform while it assists the kusala citta.
Learning about these sobhana cetasikas will help us to see that good
qualities do not belong to a self. It is not ``I'' who is generous,
who has kindness or compassion, they are sobhana cetasikas which
assist the kusala citta.

We would like to have kusala citta more often but akusala cittas are
bound to arise so long as the latent tendencies to akusala have not
been eradicated. The eradication of defilements is the goal of the
Buddha's teachings and this can be realized through the development of
insight. Right understanding should be developed together with all
other good qualities. The Buddha, when he was still a Bodhisatta,
developed right understanding together with all other kinds of
wholesomeness, he developed the wholesome qualities which are the
``perfections'' (parāmis)@footnote{The perfections of generosity,
sīla, renunciation, wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness,
determination, loving kindness and equanimity.}, during innumerable
lives so that in his last life he could attain Buddhahood. This
reminds us not to neglect the development of any kind of kusala for
which there is an opportunity. 

We have learnt about the twenty five sobhana cetasikas, but now we
should apply our knowledge in daily life. When we learn more in detail
about the opportunities for the performing of good deeds there are
conditions for using such opportunities. Good deeds can be classified
as generosity (dāna), morality (sīla) and mental development
(bhāvanā). The @emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part IV, Chapter VIII,
157) gives, with regard to kusala cittas of the sense-sphere,
mahā-kusala cittas, a tenfold classification of good deeds, namely as
the ``ten bases of meritorious deeds'' (puñña-kiriya-vatthus).
Learning about these aspects is beneficial for the practice of kusala.
We read in the @emph{Atthasālinī} about the following ``bases of
meritorious deeds'':

@enumerate

@item
charity or generosity

@item
virtue or morality

@item
culture or mental development

@item
respect

@item
dutifulness or helpfulness

@item
sharing one's merit

@item
thanksgiving or appreciation of someone else's good deeds

@item
teaching Dhamma

@item
listening to Dhamma

@item
rectification of opinion (correction of one's views)

@end enumerate

As regards the first ``base'' or way of kusala, generosity, this is
the giving away of useful things or things which give pleasure. True
generosity is difficult; while we are giving, there are not kusala
cittas all the time, and our motives for giving may not all be pure.
Akusala cittas tend to arise in between the kusala cittas, for
example, when we wish for a pleasant result, such as a happy rebirth
or a good name. We may give because we like to be popular, or we may
give with attachment to the receiver. We may give out of fear, we are
afraid of other people's opinion and hope to gain their favours by our
gifts. Stinginess may arise, we regret getting rid of our money. We
understand that we cannot take our possessions with us when we die,
but since we have accumulated stinginess it tends to arise. We should
remember that life is short and that when there is an opportunity for
giving we should use it in order to combat selfishness. In this way
the inclination to generosity can be accumulated. We read in the
Commentary to the ``Cariyāpiṭaka'' (the ``Paramatthadīpanī
VII)@footnote{Translated by Ven. Bodhi, included in The All-embracing
Net of Views, the Brahmajāla Sutta and its commentaries, B.P.S. Kandy,
p. 322.}, which deals with the ``perfections'' the Bodhisatta
accumulated, that the Bodhisatta considered the perfection of
generosity as follows:

@quotation

Surely, I have not been accustomed to giving in the past, therefore a
desire to give does not arise now in my mind. So that my mind will
delight in giving in the future, I will give a gift. With an eye for
the future let me now relinquish what I have to those in need.

@end quotation

Further on we read in the same commentary:

@quotation

When the Great Being is giving a gift, and he sees the loss of the
object being given, he reflects thus: ``This is the nature of material
possessions, that they are subject to loss and to passing away.
Moreover, it is because I did not give such gifts in the past that my
possessions are now depleted. Let me then give whatever I have as a
gift, whether it be limited or abundant. In that way I will, in the
future, reach the peak in the perfection of giving.''

@end quotation

The @emph{Atthasālinī} explains in the section on ``charity'', that
there can be volition (kamma) which is kusala before the actual
giving, namely when one produces the things to be given, at the time
of making the gift, and afterwards when one recollects it ``with
joyful heart''. Thus, giving can be an occasion for kusala cittas in
three different periods: before, during and after the giving. It is
useful to know that we can recollect our giving afterwards with kusala
citta. However, we have to know the difference between kusala citta
and akusala citta, otherwise we are likely to take attachment to our
kusala or to the pleasant feeling which may arise for kusala. When we
are honest with ourselves we can notice that before, during and after
the giving there are not kusala cittas all the time, that there are
also akusala cittas arising. Instead of being discouraged about
akusala there can be mindfulness of it. This is the way to know that
it is only a conditioned reality, not self. Before the actual giving
we may get tired when we have to buy or prepare the gift and then
aversion is likely to arise. While we are giving the gift the receiver
may be ungrateful and not respond to our gift in the way we expected
and then we may be disappointed. However, when we have right
understanding of what kusala is we will be less inclined to mind the
reactions of someone else. Kusala is kusala and nobody can change the
kusala citta which arises. Before we learnt about the Buddha's
teachings we did not consider generosity in this way. We used to pay
attention merely to the outward appearance of deeds, we thought of
people, of their reactions. Through the Dhamma we learn to investigate
the cittas which motivate our deeds, we learn to see realities as they
are. Also the recollection of our generosity after the giving can be
disturbed by the arising of defilements such as stinginess. Generosity
can only become perfected through the development of right
understanding of nāma and rūpa. The sotāpanna (streamwinner) has
eradicated the wrong view of self and also stinginess. Thus he has
perfect generosity, stinginess cannot arise again. 

When we perform acts of generosity, the objects which can be given are
the objects which can be experienced through the six doors. The
@emph{Atthasālinī} (I, Book I, Part II, 77) illustrates the giving of
colour with a story about the treasurer of King Duṭṭhagāmani who
presented a dress embroidered with gold at the great shrine, saying,
``This dress is golden in appearance, the Supreme Buddha is also
golden in appearance; the golden cloth suits the Golden One, and it
will be our gift of colour.'' With the intention to make an offering
of sound one can offer a musical instrument such as a drum to the
Triple Gem. With the intention to make a gift of flavour one may
offer, for example, a root with a captivating flavour. 

We read in the same section of the @emph{Atthasālinī} that, when
someone makes the gift with his own hands it is an act through the
body. When he tells his relatives or friends to present his offering
it is an act of speech. When he is considering to make a gift it is an
act of thought. Afterwards he will do what is necessary by act or
speech in order to accomplish his intention.

The @emph{Atthasālinī} (in the same section, 77) explains that, when
someone in giving gifts observes the tradition of his family or
observes usage, the giving is accomplished by sīla, morality.
Observing rules of tradition which are the foundation of wholesome
conduct is sīla. 

Even when one does not have things to give there can still be
accomplishment of generosity. Another one of the ten ``bases'' which
is also a way of generosity is the ``base of thanksgiving'' or
rejoicing in someone else's kusala. In order to be able to apply
ourselves to this way of kusala we should understand the benefit of
kusala. When we have confidence ourselves in generosity, in the
observance of morality and in the development of insight, we can
appreciate these ways of kusala in someone else. We can appreciate the
good qualities of someone else and express our appreciation in words
so that others may also rejoice in such qualities. When we appreciate
someone else's kusala there is generosity, envy does not arise at such
moments. When we know about this way of generosity we may remember to
speak with kusala citta about the good qualities of other people
instead of saying unpleasant things about them. 

There is still another way of generosity and this is the ``base''
which is the ``sharing of one's merit''. We cannot transfer to others
the kusala we perform nor the result it will produce; each person
receives the results of his own good deeds. However, we can by
performing good deeds be a condition for other people to have kusala
cittas as well, namely, when they rejoice in our good deeds. In this
way we can ``share merit'' with others, even with beings in other
planes of existence, provided they are in planes where they are able
to receive this benefit. 

The commentary to the ``Without the Walls'' sutta (the ``Illustrator
of Ultimate Meaning'', paramatthajotikā, commentary to the ``Minor
Readings'', Khuddakapāṭha) narrates that King Bimbisāra offered a meal
to the Buddha and omitted to dedicate his gift to other beings. Ghosts
who were his relatives in a former life had hoped for this in vain and
because of disappointment and despair they made a horrible screeching
in the night. The Buddha explained why the ghosts had screeched. Then
King Bimbisāra made again an offering and did not omit to make the
dedication, ``Let this be for those relatives''. The ghosts benefited
from his gifts immediately, they had kusala cittas and their suffering
was allayed. Lotus-covered pools were generated for them in which
they could bathe and drink, and they took on the colour of gold.
Moreover, heavenly food, heavenly clothing and heavenly palaces were
generated for them. This story illustrates that one can share one's
merit with beings who are departed. If one's departed relatives are
not able to receive this benefit other beings can. The sutta which has
been explained in the commentary ends with the following words:

@example

Give gifts then for departed ones, 
Recalling what they used to do.
No weeping nor yet sorrowing, 
Nor any kind of mourning, aids
Departed Ones, whose kin remain
(Unhelpful to them, acting) thus.
But when this offering is given
Well placed in the Community
For them, then it can serve them long
In future and at once as well.

The true Idea@footnote{The Dhamma.} for relatives has thus been
shown,
And how high honour to departed ones is done,
And how the bhikkhus can be given strength as well,
And how great merit can be stored away by you.

@end example

It is understandable that we are sad when we lose beloved ones, but if
we know how to develop what is wholesome it can be a great
consolation. Instead of sadness and aversion there can be kusala
citta when we dedicate our good deeds to all those who are able to
rejoice in it. It can become our custom to share wholesomeness with
others. 

It is a Buddhist custom when a meal or robes are offered to the monks
to pour water over one's hands while the monks recite words of
blessing, in order to give expression to one's intention to dedicate
this deed to other beings. The water is like a river which fills the
ocean and even so a wholesome deed is so plentiful that it can be
shared with others. 

Some of the ``ten bases of meritorious deeds'' are included in
morality, sīla. Abstinence from ill deeds is sīla. There is abstinence
from akusala kamma through the body and this is abstinence from
killing, stealing and sexual misconduct. There is abstinence from
akusala kamma through speech and this is abstinence from lying,
slandering, rude speech and idle talk. When we commit wrong deeds for
the sake of our livelihood, there is wrong livelihood. When we abstain
from wrong livelihood there is right livelihood. As we have seen (in
chapter 32), the three sobhana cetasikas which are abstinence from
wrong speech, abstinence from wrong action and abstinence from wrong
livelihood perform their functions in assisting the kusala citta while
there is an occasion for abstaining from evil conduct. Sīla is not
only abstaining from what should not be done, it is also observing
what should be done. We can observe moral precepts which are the
foundation of wholesome conduct. A layman can make a resolution to
observe them. He makes the resolution to undertake the rule of
training to abstain from the following unwholesome deeds:

@itemize

@item
killing living beings

@item
stealing

@item
sexual misbehaviour

@item
lying

@item
the taking of intoxicants such as alcoholic drinks
@end itemize

It is a Buddhist custom for laypeople to recite the five precepts when
they are assembled in a temple on special occasions. When one recites
them with a sincere inclination there is an opportunity for
wholesomeness. Conditions are accumulated for wholesome conduct, for
observing the precepts also when one is in difficult circumstances
which make it hard to observe them. Morality can be considered also
under the aspect of generosity, as a form of giving, because when we
give up defilements it is also for the benefit and happiness of other
beings; we let them live in safety and in peace. When we abstain from
killing we give the gift of life. When we see morality as a gift of
kindness to others and as a way to have less selfishness we can be
inspired to observe it.

As regards abstinence from slandering, rude speech and idle talk,
these are not among the five precepts for laypeople. However, engaging
in these kinds of speech is akusala whereas abstaining from them is
kusala kamma. We are inclined to be heedless with regard to abstinence
from wrong speech. When others speak in an unpleasant way about people
we may find it hard not to join in the conversation. Or we may find
abstinence of useless, idle talk a way of morality which is hard to
observe. So long as one is not an arahat there are still opportunities
for speaking with akusala citta. In the development of wholesomeness
one has to be farsighted. We should realize that what we accumulate
today, wholesomeness or unwholesomeness, can have its effects in the
future, even in future lives. We can become more clever in evaluating
the circumstances we are in, and the friends we have: we will be able
to judge whether surroundings and friends are favourable for the
development of wholesomeness or not. We will know what kind of speech
should be avoided, what kind of speech is helpful. Since we will be
engaged in conversation with others anyway we should learn how we can
turn the conversation into an opportunity for wholesomeness. We may
remember the way of generosity which is appreciation of other people's
kusala while we speak. Or when the conversation tends to be idle talk
about pleasant objects, such as good food, nice weather or journeys,
there is an opportunity for sympathetic joy. We can rejoice in other
people's good fortune of receiving pleasant objects. We should,
however, know when the citta is kusala citta and when akusala citta.
Otherwise we may erroneously think that there is the sobhana cetasika
of sympathetic joy when there is actually attachment.

The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (Chapter I) deals with many aspects of sīla.
For the monks there is the observance of the rules of the Order of
monks (Paṭimokkha). It is difficult to observe morality perfectly for
a layman; he may find himself in circumstances where it is hard not to
neglect morality. He may be tempted to kill insects in house and
garden, to evade taxes or to accept bribes. The person who has
accumulated inclinations for the monkhood leaves his home for the
homeless life in order to observe morality perfectly and to lead a
life of non-violence and of contentment with little. The monk should
not delight in gain and honour. He should not give hints nor use other
means of scheming in order to obtain the requisites of robes, food,
dwelling and medicines, and this is training in livelihood
purification, which is an aspect of sīla mentioned in the
@emph{Visuddhimagga}. Another aspect of sīla is reflecting wisely on
the use of the requisites. The monk should train himself not to be
attached to the requisites but he should know that they are not for
pleasure, that they are to be used for his health and comfort. Thus he
can dedicate himself to the study and teaching of Dhamma and the
development of right understanding. Also laypeople can reflect wisely,
for example, on food, while they are eating. Food is most of the time
an object of attachment and it can also be an object of aversion.
There may be moments that we reflect wisely, with kusala citta, on the
use of food: food can be considered as a medicine for the body. Then
we will be less inclined to indulge in food. Overeating leads to
laziness.

Another aspect of sīla mentioned by the @emph{Visuddhimagga} (I, 42 B)
is ``virtue of restraint of the sense faculties''. We read in this
section a quotation from the ``Middle Length Sayings'' I, 27, the
``Lesser Discourse on the Simile of the Elephant's Footprint''. The
text states: 

@quotation
@dots{}On seeing a visible object with the eye, he apprehends
neither the signs nor the particulars through which, if he left the
eye faculty unguarded, evil and unprofitable states of covetousness
and grief might invade him, he enters upon the way of its restraint,
he guards the eye faculty, undertakes the restraint of the eye
faculty@dots{}

@end quotation

The same is said of the other five doors. When there is mindfulness of
one reality at a time as it presents itself through one of the six
doors, there is the observance of sīla, good moral conduct. Moreover,
the understanding is being developed which can eradicate defilements.
If one separates the observance of sīla from the development of
insight sīla cannot become enduring. If one does not develop insight
defilements can be temporarily subdued but not eradicated.

Through the development of right understanding sīla can become more
perfected. As we have seen, the three cetasikas which are the
``abstinences'' arise only one at a time when they accompany kusala
citta which is not lokuttara but lokiya, ``mundane''. When
enlightenment is attained all three of them accompany the lokuttara
citta. At the moment of the path-consciousness, magga-citta, there is
``abstinence by way of eradication''; that is the function of the
three factors of right speech, right action and right livelihood of
the eightfold Path which is lokuttara. Tendencies to evil conduct are
eradicated at the subsequent stages of enlightenment, until they are
all eradicated at the attainment of arahatship.

The paying of respect to those who deserve respect is another one of
the ``bases of meritorious deeds'' and this is included in sīla.
Respect is due to monks, novices, parents, teachers and elderly
people. We can express respect and politeness through our conduct in
body and speech. We may have selfish motives when we are polite, for
example when we wish for a good reputation or when we want to obtain
favours. That is not the way of kusala which is respect. We can pay
respect with kusala citta, and then respect is sincere. We should pay
respect to the monks because they have left their homes for the
homeless life in order to strive after the virtues of the ariyans. The
goal of monkhood is arahatship and thus the monks can remind us of the
virtues of the ariyan Sangha, even if they are not arahats. Laypeople
can pay respect to monks by clasping their hands and bowing their
head, or by prostrating the body and touching the floor with the
forehead, the forearms and knees. When one shows one's respect in this
way one should do it thoughtfully and sincerely, remembering that this
is another opportunity for kusala citta.

We may pay respect to the Triple Gem in prostrating before a Buddha
statue and reciting words of praise while we think of the excellent
qualities of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. However, there are
not kusala cittas all the time. When we experience some bodily
discomfort akusala cittas with aversion tend to arise. Or we may think
of other things with attachment or aversion. We should know the
difference between kusala citta and akusala citta, they arise because
of their own conditions and they are not self. While we are reciting
words of praise to the Triple Gem there can be mindfulness of
realities which appear, even if these are akusala dhammas. Mindfulness
of whatever reality appears is the best way of respect we can give to
the Buddha since we then follow what he taught. 

We read in the @emph{Dhammapada} (verse 109)@footnote{I am using the
translation by Ven. Khantipalo, in The Buddhist Monk's Discipline,
Wheel no. 130/131, B.P.S. Kandy.} about the fruits of paying respect:

@example

He of respectful nature who
Ever the elders honouring,
Four qualities for him increase:
Long-life and beauty, happiness and strength.

@end example

The ``base of meritorious action'' which is dutifulness or helpfulness
is also an aspect of sīla. When there are opportunities for helping
others we tend to be lazy and forgetful, we are slow in our reactions
instead of responding quickly to the needs of someone else. For
example, when we are reading an interesting book we may not be
inclined to get up and help someone who needs help. If we remember
that there are many ways of helping others, that even helping in small
matters is beneficial, there will be conditions to use such
opportunities for kusala. We may, for example, show someone who got
lost the right way, we may help someone in handing him a cup or a dish
he needs, or we may help in listening to someone's problems and giving
him advice. 

Another one of the bases of meritorious deeds is listening to Dhamma
and this is included in mental development. When we listen to the
Dhamma and study it we learn what is kusala and what akusala, we learn
about kamma and vipāka and the way how to develop kusala. Development
of calm and of insight starts with listening; there could not be any
mental development if one does not know how to apply oneself to it.
Listening to the Dhamma or reading the scriptures and considering what
we learnt are conditions for the arising of mindfulness of nāma and
rūpa. Although we know that listening to the Dhamma and studying it is
beneficial we may be inclined to put it off. We believe that we have
too many duties to perform or we are distracted by the enjoyment of
pleasant objects. When we really see the usefulness of the study of
the Dhamma we can accumulate the inclination to listen to the Dhamma
or to read the scriptures. Reading even a few lines at a time can be
most beneficial.

Teaching or explaining the Dhamma is another one of the ten ``bases of
meritorious deeds''. Both the person who explains the Dhamma and the
listener can benefit, since both are reminded of the truth of Dhamma
and of the need to apply the Dhamma. Teaching Dhamma is not easy, one
should consider the capacity of the listener to receive the Dhamma.
One can start with subjects which are more easily understandable such
as generosity, and later on explain about the development of
understanding which eradicates defilements. It is essential to learn
about the ways of developing generosity and to apply them, because if
one cannot give up things one possesses how could one give up clinging
to self and other defilements? The Buddha preached to general Sīha a
graduated discourse on almsgiving, the precepts and on heaven (Gradual
Sayings, Book of the Eights, Chapter 2, par 2). When the Buddha saw
that Sīha was ready to receive the teaching of the four noble Truths
he taught these to him. The teaching of Dhamma should be gradual; in
the beginning one does not see the disadvantages of clinging. When one
understands the dangers of defilements one wants to learn to develop
the way leading to the eradication of defilements. The gift of Dhamma
is the highest gift because through learning the Dhamma one can
develop the understanding which eradicates defilements and leads to
the end of dukkha. Thus the teaching of Dhamma can also be considered
as an aspect of generosity, dāna. 

Both the development of calm and the development of insight are ways
of mental development, the tenth ``base of meritorious deeds''. As
regards calm, this can be developed for the purpose of temporarily
subduing defilements. The @emph{Visuddhimagga} (Chapter III-XI)
explains how calm can be developed even to the degree of jhāna by
means of a meditation subject. It is extremely difficult to develop
calm to the stage of jhāna, but some of the meditation subjects which
are dealt with in the @emph{Visuddhimagga} can also be used as
recollections in daily life and then they can condition mahā-kusala
cittas. The ``ten bases of meritorious deeds'' are objects of
mahā-kusala cittas, kusala cittas of the sense-sphere, and, therefore,
calm to the degree of jhāna is not dealt with in this context by the
@emph{Atthasālinī}. Those who have accumulated conditions for the
attainment of jhāna have first to develop, by means of a meditation
subject, calm which accompanies mahā-kusala citta. 

In order to develop calm we should know when the citta is akusala
citta and when kusala citta. When we have studied the akusala
cetasikas and sobhana cetasikas we know in theory what is akusala
citta and what is kusala citta, but we may not be able yet to apply
our knowledge in daily life. We may not know what type of citta arises
at the present moment. There are innumerable moments of clinging after
seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions, but we do not notice
them. When clinging is not as coarse as greed or lust it may pass
unnoticed. When we make plans what to do next, when we go somewhere,
when we want to get something or when we want a rest in the afternoon
there are likely to be countless moments of clinging. We have learnt
that the development of loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy
and equanimity in daily life can condition moments of calm, but it is
difficult to recognize the characteristic of calm. We may erroneously
believe that the citta is kusala citta with calm when it is
accompanied by indifferent feeling. However, kusala citta as well as
akusala citta can be accompanied by indifferent feeling. It is
essential to learn more about our different cittas and this is mental
development. When we know the characteristic of true calm which arises
with kusala citta, calm can be developed.

As regards vipassanā, insight, this is the understanding of realities
which can eradicate the latent tendencies of defilements so that they
cannot arise again. If we develop good qualities without developing
right understanding of realities defilements cannot be eradicated.
Akusala cittas are bound to arise time and again, even in between the
moments we are performing good deeds. The eradication of defilements
is the goal of the Buddha's teachings. For mindfulness of nāma and
rūpa there is an opportunity at any time, but when mindfulness has not
been accumulated it does not often arise. We may become impatient and
have aversion when there is lack of mindfulness, but then we should
remember that the moments of awareness and also the moments of
forgetfulness arise because of conditions, that they are not self.
Moments of ignorance of realities are real, thus, they can also be
object of awareness.

One of the ``Perfections'', the wholesome qualities the Bodhisatta
developed, was determination, the resolution to continue developing
understanding in whatever situation he was. We read in the commentary
to the ``Cariyāpiṭaka'' (the Paramatthadīpanī VII)@footnote{Translated
by Ven. Bodhi, included in The All-embracing Net of Views, p. 323.} :

@quotation
@dots{}For when the Great Man, straining and striving for the
fulfilment of the requisites of enlightenment, encounters troubles
difficult to endure, depriving him of happiness and his means of
support, or when he encounters injuries imposed by beings and
formations---difficult to overcome, violent, sapping the vitality---
then, since he has surrendered himself to the Buddhas, he reflects:
``I have relinquished my very self to the Buddhas. Whatever comes,
let it come.'' For this reason he does not waver, does not quake, does
not undergo the least vacillation, but remains absolutely unshaken in
his determination to undertake the good.

@end quotation

When we are in very unpleasant circumstances we find it difficult to
be mindful of realities. We lack determination. We want to control the
experience of sense objects, we want objects to be pleasant. We forget
that the experience of sense objects such as seeing or hearing is
vipāka, conditioned by kamma. The realities which appear have been
conditioned already and if we learn to be mindful of them there will
be less inclination to try to exert control over them. Then there will
be more patience and more determination to continue developing right
understanding in whatever situation. 

The tenth ``base of meritorious deeds'' is ``rectification of view''.
There are many degrees of this way of wholesomeness. Before we studied
the Dhamma we may have considered the enjoyment of pleasant sense
objects to be the goal of our life. As we gradually come to see that
selfishness leads to unhappiness and that kusala is beneficial both
for ourselves and for others we start to correct our wrong ideas. We
may, for example, be absorbed in the enjoyment of something pleasant
such as listening to music, but then, when someone else suddenly needs
our help, we may realize that it is more beneficial to help someone
than to continue being selfish. However, each situation is
conditioned and there is no self who can choose what action he will
perform in a given situation. We correct our views when we come to
understand that wholesome deeds are kusala kamma which will produce
kusala vipāka. We should not cling to pleasant results, that is
akusala. Kamma will produce its result, no matter whether we think of
it or not. While we are performing good deeds there can be
understanding of cause and effect without clinging. We correct our
views most of all by developing right understanding of realities. In
that way the clinging to the concept of self will decrease, we will be
less inclined to take akusala or kusala for self. The ``rectification
of view'' can go together with the other nine ``bases of meritorious
deeds'', thus, with any kind of wholesome action. 

The ten ``bases of meritorious deeds'' are included in generosity,
sīla and mental development. The Buddha, when he was a Bodhisatta,
developed with perseverance all kinds of wholesomeness together with
right understanding. He had no selfish purposes but he was truly
intent on the happiness of all beings. We read in the @emph{Dialogues
of the Buddha} (III, no. 30, ``The Marks of the Superman'') about the
good deeds he performed during the lives he was a Bodhisatta, about
the results produced by his good deeds, and about the special bodily
features which are the ``marks'' of a Buddha and which are conditioned
by these good deeds. I shall quote some passages which deal with his
generosity, his purity of conduct and his wisdom:

@quotation
@dots{}Whereas in whatsoever former birth, former state of becoming,
former sojourning, monks, the Tathāgata, then being human, took on
mighty enterprise in all good things, took on unfaltering enterprise
in all good things, took on unfaltering enterprise in seemly course of
deed and word and thought:---in dispensing gifts, in virtuous
undertakings, in keeping of festivals, in filial duties to mother and
father, in pious duties to recluse and brahmin, in honour of the head
of the house and in other such things of lofty merit@dots{}(145)
@dots{}Whereas in whatsoever former births@dots{}the Tathāgata,
then being human, lived for the weal of the great multitudes,
dispeller of dread and panic, purveyor of just protection and
wardenship and giver of supplies@dots{}(148) 
@dots{}Whereas in former birth@dots{}the Tathāgata, then being
human, putting away the taking of life, refrained therefrom and laying
the scourge and sword aside, dwelt gentle and compassionate, merciful
and friendly to all living creatures@dots{}(149) 
@dots{}Whereas in whatsoever former birth@dots{}the Tathāgata,
then being human, drew near and questioned recluse or brahmin, saying:
What sir, is good? What is bad? What is right, what wrong? What ought
I to do, or not to do? What when I have done it will long be for my
unhappiness@dots{}or for my happiness?@dots{}(157)
@dots{}Whereas in whatsoever former birth@dots{}the Tathāgata,
then being human, lived without wrath, full of serenity, and even when
much had been said, fell not foul of anyone, was neither angry, nor
malign, nor enraged, manifesting neither anger nor hate nor
melancholy, but was a giver of fine and soft coverlets, and cloaks,
and fine linen, fine cotton, fine silken, fine woollen stuffs@dots{}
(159)
@dots{}Whereas in whatsoever former birth@dots{}the Tathāgata,
then being human, grew desirous for the good of the many, for their
welfare, their comfort, their safety, considering how they might
increase in confidence, in morality, in education, in charity, in
righteousness, and in wisdom, might increase in money and corn, in
land, in animals two footed and four footed, in wife and children, in
servants and slaves, in kinsfolk and friends and connections@dots{}
(164)
@dots{}Whereas in whatsoever former birth@dots{}the Tathāgata,
then being human, put away abusive speech, revolted against abusive
speech, what he heard here not repeating elsewhere, to raise a quarrel
against people here; and what he heard elsewhere not repeating here,
to raise a quarrel against people there:---thus becoming a binder
together of those who are divided, or fostering those who are friends,
a peacemaker, lover of concord, impassioned for peace, a speaker of
words that make for peace@dots{}(171, 172)

@end quotation

This sutta can encourage us to apply the Buddha's teachings. The
Bodhisatta gave us an example to always be eager to listen and to
learn, to develop all kinds of good qualities and above all to develop
understanding of realities. When we read about all the virtues the
Bodhisatta accumulated in his former lives, we can be reminded that
the effect of the development of understanding will eventually be to
have less defilements, to become less selfish and more generous, to
have more genuine concern for other people. 

@node Appendix to Chapter 2
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 2

@section The Feelings which accompany the different cittas

@emph{Pleasant bodily feeling} (sukha) arises with only one type of
citta: the body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa) which is kusala vipāka.
This kind of kāya-viññāṇa experiences a pleasant tangible object. 

@emph{Painful bodily feeling} (dukkha) arises with only one type of
citta: the kāya-viññāṇa which is akusala vipāka. This kind of
kāya-viññāṇa experiences an unpleasant tangible object. 

@emph{Happy feeling} (somanassa) arises with cittas of the four jātis
but not with every citta. As regards akusala cittas accompanied by
somanassa, four of the eight types of lobha-mūla-citta are accompanied
by somanassa. The other types of akusala citta are not accompanied by
somanassa. 

As regards @emph{ahetuka cittas (cittas without roots, hetus) ,}
accompanied by somanassa, one type of santīraṇa-citta (investigating
consciousness) which is ahetuka kusala vipākacitta, and which
investigates an extraordinarily pleasant object, is accompanied by
somanassa. One type of santīraṇa-citta which is ahetuka kusala
vipākacitta and which investigates a pleasant but not extraordinarily
pleasant object, is accompanied by upekkhā. The santīraṇa-citta which
is akusala vipākacitta is also accompanied by upekkhā. Thus, only one
of the three types of santīraṇa-citta is accompanied by
somanassa@footnote{Abhidhamma in Daily Life Chapter 9}.

The ahetuka kiriyacitta which is the hasituppāda-citta producing the
smile of an arahat@footnote{Ibidem Chapter 9} is accompanied by
somanassa. 

Of the kāmāvacara sobhana cittas@footnote{Ibidem Chapter 19.
Kāmāvacara-sobhana cittas, beautiful cittas of the sense-sphere are:
eight types of mahā-kusala cittas, eight types of mahā-vipākacittas
and eight types of mahā-kiriyacittas (inoperative, neither cause nor
result) which are cittas of the arahat.} (beautiful cittas of the
sense-sphere) four types of mahā-kusala cittas, four types of
mahā-vipākacittas and four types of mahā-kiriyacittas are accompanied
by somanassa. 

The functions of paṭisandhi (rebirth), bhavanga (life-continuum) and
cuti (dying) can be performed by mahā-vipākacittas@footnote{Ibidem
Chapter 19}. In that case they are the result of kamma performed by
mahā-kusala cittas. Mahā-vipākacittas can be accompanied by somanassa
depending on the kamma which produces them. Those who are born with
somanassa have bhavanga-cittas accompanied by somanassa throughout
life.@footnote{The bhavanga-citta is the same type of citta as the
paṭisandhi-citta.} 

As regards rūpāvacara cittas (rūpa-jhānacittas)@footnote{Ibidem
Chapter 22.}, those of the first, second, third and fourth stages of
jhāna (of the fivefold system) are accompanied by somanassa. Thus,
four rūpāvacara kusala cittas, four rūpāvacara vipākacittas and four
rūpāvacara kiriyacittas are accompanied by somanassa. The rūpāvacara
cittas of the fifth stage of jhāna are not accompanied by somanassa
but by upekkhā. 

As regards arūpāvacara cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas), these are of the
same type of citta as the rūpāvacara cittas of the fifth stage of
jhāna, thus, they are not accompanied by somanassa but by upekkhā. 

Lokuttara cittas can be accompanied by somanassa or by upekkhā,
depending on conditions. Lokuttara cittas can be classified as eight,
since there are for each of the four stages of enlightenment the
magga-citta (path-consciousness) and its result, the phala-citta
(fruition-consciousness). 

People who have accumulated great skill in jhāna and who have also
developed insight, can attain enlightenment with @emph{lokuttara
jhāna-cittas.} The lokuttara jhānacittas, which experience nibbāna,
are accompanied by jhāna-factors of different the stages of jhāna.
When lokuttara jhānacittas are taken into account, there are, instead
of eight lokuttara cittas, forty lokuttara cittas (five times eight,
since there are five stages of jhāna)@footnote{This is the reason why
cittas can be counted as eighty-nine or as hundred and twenty-one,
which include lokuttara jhānacittas.}. In the case of the lokuttara
jhānacittas, the accompanying feeling is in accordance with the
accompanying jhāna-factors. In the fifth stage of jhāna there is
upekkhā instead of somanassa, and therefore eight lokuttara
jhānacittas, accompanied by the jhāna-factors of the fifth stage, are
not accompanied by somanassa but by upekkhā. Thus, of the forty
lokuttara jhānacittas thirty-two types are accompanied by somanassa.
The feeling which accompanies the phala-citta (fruition-consciousness,
the result of the magga-citta) is in each case the same type as the
feeling which accompanies the magga-citta. 

Summarizing the cittas accompanied by somanassa, they are:

@itemize

@item
4 lobha-mūla-cittas

@item
1 santīraṇa-citta

@item
1 hasituppāda-citta

@item
12 kāmāvacara sobhana cittas

@item
12 rūpāvacara cittas

@item
32 lokuttara jhānacittas
@end itemize
---altogether: 62

@emph{Domanassa}, unhappy feeling, arises with the two types of
dosa-mūla-citta: one type is asaṅkhārika (unprompted) and one type is
sasaṅkhārika (prompted)@footnote{unprompted: arisen without
inducement, spontaneously; prompted: arisen because of inducement
either by oneself or by someone else.}. Domanassa cannot arise with
other types of citta except these two. 

@emph{Upekkhā}, indifferent feeling, can arise with cittas of the four
jātis but it does not arise with every citta. Thus, upekkhā can be
kusala, akusala, vipāka and kiriya. Upekkhā can arise with kāmāvacara
cittas (cittas of the sense-sphere), rūpāvacara cittas, arūpāvacara
cittas and lokuttara cittas.

As regards upekkhā which accompanies akusala cittas, four of the eight
types of lobha-mūla-citta are accompanied by upekkhā. Upekkhā also
accompanies the two types of moha-mūla-citta which are:
moha-mūla-citta accompanied by vicikicchā (doubt) and moha-mūla-citta
accompanied by uddhacca (restlessness)@footnote{@emph{Abhidhamma in
Daily Life} Chapter 7}.

As regards @emph{ahetuka cittas,} fourteen among the eighteen types
are accompanied by @emph{upekkhā}, namely: twelve ahetuka vipākacittas
which are: four pairs of dvi-pañcaviññāṇas (the pair which is
body-consciousness is excepted), two types of sampaṭicchana-citta
(receiving-consciousness), and two among the three types of santīraṇa
(investigating-consciousness). Only santīraṇa-citta which investigates
an extraordinarily pleasant object is, as we have seen, accompanied by
somanassa. The other two types, one of which is kusala vipāka and one
of which is akusala vipāka, are accompanied by
upekkhā@footnote{Santīraṇa-citta can also perform the function of
rebirth. When it is akusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā, it can
perform the function of rebirth in woeful planes. When it is kusala
vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā, it can perform the function of rebirth
of those who are handicapped from the first moment of life. The same
type of citta which performs the function of rebirth, also performs
the functions of bhavanga and cuti, dying, in that life.}. 

The are two types of ahetuka kiriyacittas which are accompanied by
upekkhā, namely: the pañcadvārāvajjana-citta (the
five-sense-door-adverting-consciousness) and the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta (the mind-door-adverting-consciousness) which
performs, in the sense-door process, the function of determining the
object (votthapana)@footnote{@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life} Chapter
9} and in the mind-door process the function of adverting to the
object through the mind-door. Thus, there are fourteen types of
ahetuka citta in all which are accompanied by upekkhā. 

As regards kāmāvacara sobhana cittas, four of the eight mahā-kusala
cittas, four of the eight mahā-vipākacittas and four of the eight
mahā-kiriyacittas are accompanied by upekkhā. Thus, twelve kāmāvacara
sobhana cittas are accompanied by upekkhā.

As regards rūpāvacara cittas, only the rūpāvacara kusala citta, the
rūpāvacara vipāka-citta and the rūpāvacara kiriyacitta of the fifth
stage of jhāna are accompanied by upekkhā; thus, there are three
rūpāvacara cittas accompanied by upekkhā. 

The arūpāvacara cittas are the same types of citta as the rūpāvacara
cittas of the fifth stage of jhāna; they all are accompanied by
upekkhā. There are twelve arūpāvacara cittas, namely the arūpāvacara
kusala citta, the arūpāvacara vipākacitta and the arūpāvacara
kiriyacitta of each of the four stages of arūpa-jhāna. At the fourth
stage of arūpa-jhāna, the 'Sphere of Neither Perception nor
Non-Perception', there is 'neither feeling nor non-feeling', feeling
is present 'in a subtle state as a residual formation' (Vis. X,
50)@footnote{@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life} Chapter 22}. 

As regards lokuttara cittas, they can, depending on conditions, be
accompanied by upekkhā. When @emph{lokuttara jhāna-cittas} are taken
into account, the lokuttara cittas accompanied by the jhāna-factors of
the fifth stage of jhāna are accompanied by upekkhā, thus, there are
eight types accompanied by upekkhā. 

Summarizing, the cittas accompanied by upekkhā are the following :

@itemize

@item
4lobha-mūla-cittas 

@item
2moha-mūla-cittas

@item
1pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta

@item
8dvi-pañca-viññāṇas 

@item
2sampaṭicchana-cittas

@item
2santīraṇa cittas

@item
1mano-dvārāvajjana-citta 

@item
12kāmāvacara sobhana cittas

@item
3rūpāvacara cittas

@item
12arūpāvacara cittas

@item
8lokuttara cittas 
@end itemize
---altogether: 55 types accompanied by upekkhā.

@node Appendix to Chapter 5
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 5

@section Cetanā as a link in the ``Dependant Origination''
Cetanā as a link in the ``Dependant Origination'' is called
@emph{abhisaṅkhāra.} There are three kinds of @emph{abhisaṅkhāra}: 
@enumerate

@item
meritorious kamma-formations (puññ'ābhisaṅkhāra)@footnote{Puñña
means merit, kusala.}

@item
demeritorious kamma-formations (apuññ'ābhisaṅkhāra)

@item
imperturbable kamma-formations (āneñj'ābhisaṅkhāra)
@end enumerate

@emph{Meritorious kamma-formations} are the cetanās which accompany
the eight kāmāvacara kusala cittas or mahā-kusala cittas (kusala
cittas of the sense-sphere)@footnote{@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life}
Chapter 10.}, and the five rūpāvacara kusala cittas
(rūpa-jhānacittas)@footnote{@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life} Chapter
22}.

@emph{Demeritorious kamma-formations} are the cetanās which accompany
the twelve akusala cittas, which are: eight lobha-mūla-cittas, two
dosa-mūla-cittas and two moha-mūla-cittas.

@emph{Imperturbable kamma-formations} are the cetanās which accompany
the four arūpāvacara kusala cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas). The
meritorious kamma-formations and the demeritorious kamma-formations
which produce rebirth-consciousness also produce rūpa. The
imperturbable kamma-formations do not produce rūpa. Those who
cultivate arūpa-jhāna have realized the disadvantages of rūpa. The
arūpāvacara kusala cittas which are very tranquil, very refined,
produce rebirth-consciousness in the relevant arūpa-brahma planes
where there is no rūpa and no sense-impressions. There are four
arūpa-brahma planes corresponding to the four stages of arūpa-jhāna. 

These three classes of kamma-formations are a link in the Dependent
Origination. 

@node Appendix to Chapter 8
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 8


@section The cittas which are accompanied by vitakka and vicāra

Both vitakka and vicāra arise with 44 kāmāvacara cittas, the ten
dvi-pañcaviññāṇas are excluded.

As regards jhānacittas, vitakka accompanies only the three rūpāvacara
cittas of the first stage of jhāna, whereas vicāra accompanies the
three rūpāvacara cittas of the first stage of jhāna and the three
rūpāvacara cittas of the second stage of jhāna (of the five-fold
system), thus, altogether six rūpāvacara cittas. In the cases that the
function of paṭisandhi is performed by rūpāvacara vipākacitta, the
citta is not always accompanied by vitakka and vicāra. The rūpāvacara
vipākacitta of the second stage of jhāna (of the five-fold system) is
not accompanied by vitakka, but it is accompanied by vicāra. The
rūpāvacara vipākacittas of the subsequent stages of jhāna are not
accompanied by vitakka nor by vicāra. As regards arūpāvacara cittas,
they are of the same type of citta as the rūpāvacara cittas of the
fifth stage of rūpa-jhāna, thus, they are not accompanied by vitakka
nor by vicāra.

When lokuttara jhānacittas, lokuttara cittas accompanied by
jhāna-factors of the different stages of jhāna, are taken into
account, there are forty lokuttara cittas instead of eight. Among
these there are eight lokuttara cittas accompanied by the
jhāna-factors of the first stage of jhāna, thus these are accompanied
by both vitakka and vicāra. The lokuttara cittas accompanied by the
jhāna-factors of the second stage of jhāna (of the five-fold system)
are accompanied by vicāra but not by vitakka. The lokuttara cittas
accompanied by the jhāna-factors of the higher stages of jhāna are
without vicāra, since vicāra has been abandoned at those stages. Thus,
there are sixteen lokuttara cittas accompanied by vicāra. When cittas
are counted as 121 (including forty lokuttara cittas), @emph{vitakka}
accompanies:
@itemize

@item
44kāmāvacara cittas

@item
3rūpāvacara cittas

@item
8lokuttara cittas

@end itemize

---altogether: 55 cittas

As regards @emph{vicāra}, this cetasika accompanies:
@itemize

@item
44kāmāvacara cittas

@item
6rūpāvacara cittas

@item
16lokuttara cittas 
@end itemize

---altogether: 66 cittas

@node Appendix to Chapter 9
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 9
@section Cittas which are accompanied by viriya

The cittas which are accompanied by viriya are: all akusala cittas and
all sobhana cittas, which include sobhana cittas of the sense-sphere,
rūpāvacara cittas, arūpāvacara cittas and lokuttara cittas. Moreover,
out of the eighteen types of ahetuka cittas there are two types which
are accompanied by viriya: the @emph{mano-dvārāvajjana-citta} which in
the sense-door process performs the function of determining the object
(votthapana) and in the mind-door process the function of adverting to
the object, and the @emph{hasituppāda-citta} which causes smiling in
the case of arahats. The other sixteen types of ahetuka cittas are
not accompanied by viriya. Thus, 16 types of citta out of 89 cittas
are not accompanied by viriya. Altogether there are @emph{73 types of
citta accompanied by viriya.}

The paṭisandhi-citta, the bhavanga-citta and the cuti-citta are not
accompanied by viriya if their functions are performed by
santīraṇa-citta (two types, one kusala vipāka and one akusala
vipāka)@footnote{@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life}, Chapter 11.}. If
their functions are performed by mahā-vipākacitta they are accompanied
by viriya.

Summarizing the cittas which are accompanied by viriya, they are:
@itemize

@item
12akusala cittas

@item
2ahetuka cittas

@item
8mahā- kusala cittas

@item
8mahā-vipākacittas

@item
8mahā-kiriyacittas

@item
5rūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item
5rūpāvacara vipākacittas

@item
5rūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@item
4arūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item
4arūpāvacara vipākacittas 

@item
4arūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@item
8lokuttara cittas
@end itemize
---altogether: 73

When lokuttara cittas accompanied by the jhānafactors of the different
stages of jhāna are taken into account, there are forty lokuttara
cittas instead of eight; thus, in that case there are hundred-and-five
cittas accompanied by viriya. 

@node Appendix to Chapter 11
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 11

@section The different cittas accompanied by pīti

Four types of lobha-mūla-citta are accompanied by pīti, namely the
types which are accompanied by somanassa. Two types of ahetuka citta
are accompanied by pīti, the santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka
and which investigates an extraordinarily pleasant object and the
hasituppāda-citta, the smile-producing ahetuka kiriyacitta of the
arahat. Moreover, pīti accompanies four types of mahā-kusala cittas,
four types of mahā-vipākacittas and four types of mahā-kiriyacittas,
thus, twelve types of kāmāvacara sobhana cittas. As regards
jhānacittas, pīti accompanies the rūpāvacara kusala cittas, the
rūpāvacara vipākacittas and the rūpāvacara kiriyacittas of the first
three stages of jhāna ( of the five-fold system), thus, nine types of
rūpāvacara cittas. When lokuttara jhānacittas, lokuttara cittas
accompanied by jhāna-factors of the different stages of jhāna, are
taken into account, lokuttara cittas are classified as forty. Since
pīti does not arise in the fourth and fifth stage of jhāna, only the
lokuttara cittas arising with jhāna-factors of three stages of jhāna
are accompanied by pīti. Thus, twenty-four types of lokuttara cittas in
all (three times eight) are accompanied by pīti. 

If we count cittas as hundred and twenty-one (including forty lokuttara
cittas), the cittas accompanied by pīti are summarized as follows:
@itemize

@item
4akusala cittas

@item
2ahetuka cittas

@item
12kāmāvacara sobhana cittas

@item
9rūpāvacara cittas

@item
24lokuttara cittas

@end itemize
---altogether: 51 cittas

@node Appendix to Chapter 12
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 12

@section The cittas accompanied by chanda, zeal or wish-to-do

Chanda can be of all four jātis, but as regards the jāti which is
vipāka, chanda accompanies only mahā-vipākacittas, not ahetuka
vipākacittas; as regards the jāti which is kiriya, chanda accompanies
only mahā-kiriyacittas, not ahetuka kiriyacittas. Out of the
eighty-nine cittas, twenty cittas are not accompanied by chanda: the
two types of moha-mūla-citta and the eighteen ahetuka cittas. 

Summarizing the cittas which are accompanied by chanda, they are the
following , when cittas are counted as eighty-nine: 
@itemize

@item
10 akusala cittas

@item
24 kāmāvacara sobhana cittas

@item
15 rūpāvacara cittas

@item
12 arūpāvacara cittas

@item
8 lokuttara cittas 
@end itemize
---altogether: 69 cittas

When lokuttara cittas accompanied by the jhānafactors of the different
stages of jhāna are taken into account, there are forty lokuttara
cittas instead of eight. In that case there are hundred-and-one cittas
accompanied by chanda. 

@node Appendix to Chapter 20
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 20

@section Summary of Akusala Cetasikas

@subsection Summarizing the fourteen akusala cetasikas, they are:
@enumerate

@item
ignorance (moha)

@item
shamelessness (ahirika)

@item
recklessness or fear of blame (anottappa)

@item
restlessness (uddhacca)

@item
attachment (lobha), arising with eight types of citta, the cittas
which are lobha-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in attachment. 

@item
wrong view (diṭṭhi), arising with four types of cittas rooted in
attachment.

@item
conceit (māna), arising with the four types of cittas rooted in
attachment which are unaccompanied by wrong view. 

@item
aversion (dosa), arising with two types of citta, the cittas which
are dosa-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in aversion.

@item
envy (issā)

@item
stinginess (macchariya) 

@item
regret (kukkucca) 

@item
sloth (thīna) 

@item
torpor (middha)

@item
doubt (vicikicchā) arising with one type of moha-mūla-citta, citta
rooted in ignorance
@end enumerate
@subsection Summary of the Akusala Cittas and their accompanying Cetasikas
@enumerate

@item
@emph{citta rooted in attachment} (lobha-mūla-citta), accompanied by
pleasant feeling, with wrong view, unprompted, is accompanied by: 7
universals, 6 particulars, the four akusala cetasikas arising with
every akusala citta, which are ignorance, shamelessness, recklessness
and restlessness, and by attachment and wrong view, thus, by @emph{19
cetasikas}. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in attachment}, accompanied by pleasant feeling,
with wrong view, prompted, is accompanied by: 7 universals, 6
particulars, by the four akusala cetasikas arising with every akusala
citta, by attachment and wrong view, and it may or may not be
accompanied by sloth and torpor, thus by @emph{19 or 21 cetasikas}. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in attachment}, accompanied by pleasant feeling,
without wrong view, unprompted, is accompanied by: 7 universals, 6
particulars, the four akusala cetasikas arising with every akusala
citta, and by attachment. Conceit may or may not arise, thus, by
@emph{18 or 19 cetasikas}.

@item
@emph{citta rooted in attachment}, accompanied by pleasant feeling,
without wrong view, prompted, is accompanied by the same cetasikas as
the third type, and in addition, it may or may not be accompanied by
sloth and torpor. Thus, it can be accompanied @emph{by 18} cetasikas if
sloth, torpor and conceit do not arise, @emph{by 19} if conceit
arises, @emph{by 20} if sloth and torpor arise but no conceit, or
@emph{by 21 cetasikas} if sloth, torpor and conceit arise.

@item
@emph{citta rooted in attachment}, accompanied by indifferent
feeling, with wrong view, unprompted, is accompanied by: 7 universals,
5 particulars (less enthusiasm, pīti), the four akusala cetasikas
arising with every akusala citta, by attachment and wrong view, thus,
@emph{by 18 cetasikas}. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in} @emph{attachment}, accompanied by indifferent
feeling, with wrong view, prompted, is accompanied by: the same types
of cetasikas (18) as the fifth type of citta rooted in attachment,
but, sloth and torpor my or may not arise, thus, by @emph{18 or 20
cetasikas}. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in attachment}, accompanied by indifferent
feeling, without wrong view, unprompted, is accompanied by: the same
types of cetasikas as the fifth type of citta rooted in attachment,
but not by wrong view, thus, by 17 types of cetasikas; however,
conceit may or may not arise, thus, by @emph{17 or 18 cetasikas}. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in attachment}, accompanied by indifferent
feeling, without wrong view, prompted, is accompanied by the same
types of cetasikas as the seventh type of citta rooted in attachment,
and moreover, sloth and torpor may or may not arise; thus, by at least
@emph{17 cetasikas}, or, if conceit arises, @emph{by 18 cetasikas};
@emph{by 19 cetasikas} if sloth and torpor arise but no conceit,
@emph{by 20 cetasikas} if conceit, sloth and torpor arise. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in aversion} (dosa-mūla-citta), accompanied by 
unpleasant feeling, unprompted is accompanied by: 7 universals, 5
particulars (less enthusiasm), the four akusala cetasikas arising with
every akusala citta and by aversion, thus, by at least @emph{17
cetasikas}. Moreover, envy, stinginess or regret may or may not
arise; if they arise they do so one at a time, and thus, this type of
citta may be accompanied @emph{by 17 or 18 cetasikas}. 

@item
1@emph{citta rooted in aversion}, accompanied by unpleasant feeling,
prompted, is accompanied by the same types of cetasikas as the ninth
type of citta, thus, @emph{by 17 or 18 cetasikas}, and moreover, sloth
and torpor may or may not arise. If they arise the citta can be
accompanied @emph{by 19 or 20 cetasikas}. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in ignorance}, accompanied by indifferent
feeling,associated with doubt, is accompanied by: 7 universals, 3
particulars (no enthusiasm, determination and wish-to-do) and the four
akusala cetasikas arising with every akusala citta, and doubt, thus,
@emph{by 15 cetasikas}. 

@item
@emph{citta rooted in ignorance}, accompanied by indifferent
feeling, associated with restlessness (uddhacca-sampayutta), is
accompanied by: 7 universals, 4 particulars (no enthusiasm and
wish-to-do) and the four akusala cetasikas arising with every akusala
citta, thus, @emph{by 15 cetasikas}. 
@end enumerate

@node Appendix to Chapter 31
@chapter Appendix to Chapter 31

@subsection Nineteen Sobhana Cetasikas accompanying each Sobhana Citta

@itemize

@item
confidence, saddhā

@item
mindfulness, sati

@item
shame, hiri

@item
fear of blame, ottapa

@item
non-attachment, alobha

@item
non-aversion, adosa

@item
equanimity, tatramajjhattatā

@item
calm of cetasikas, kāya-passaddhi 

calm of citta, citta-passaddhi 

@item
lightness of cetasikas, kāya-lahutā 

lightness of citta, citta-lahutā 

@item
pliancy of cetasikas, kāya-mudutā 

pliancy of citta, citta-mudutā 

@item
wieldiness of cetasikas, kāya-kammaññatā

wieldiness of citta, citta-kammaññatā 

@item
proficiency of cetasikas, kāya-pāguññatā 

proficiency of citta, citta-pāguññatā 

@item
uprightness of cetasikas, kāya-ujukatā 

uprightness of citta, citta-ujukatā 
@end itemize

These sobhana cetasikas accompany:
@itemize

@item
eight mahā-kusala cittas 

@item
eight mahā-vipākacittas 

@item
eight mahā-kiriyacittas 

@item
five rūpāvacara kusala cittas 

@item
five rūpāvacara vipākacittas 

@item
five rūpāvacara kiriyacittas 

@item
four arūpāvacara kusala cittas 

@item
four arūpāvacara vipākacittas 

@item
four arūpāvacara kiriyacittas 

@item
eight lokuttara cittas 
@end itemize
(or forty, when lokuttara cittas accompanied by the jhāna-factors of
the different stages of jhāna are taken into account.)

@subsection Six Sobhana Cetasikas which do not accompany each Sobhana Citta:
@itemize

@item
abstinence from wrong speech, vacīduccarita virati

@item
abstinence from wrong action, kāyaduccarita virati

@item
abstinence from wrong livelihood, ājīvaduccarita virati

@item
compassion, karuṇā 

@item
sympathetic joy, muditā

@item
understanding or wisdom, paññā

@end itemize

Thus, altogether there are @emph{twenty-five sobhana cetasikas}, of
which nineteen arise with each sobhana citta and six do not arise with
each sobhana citta. 

The three abstinences (the virati cetasikas) can accompany the
following cittas:

@itemize

@item
eight mahā-kusala cittas which are of the sense-sphere (kamāvacara
cittas)

@item
eight (or forty) lokuttara cittas which are always accompanied by all
three abstinences

@item
Compassion (karuṇā) can accompany the following cittas:

@item
eight mahā-kusala cittas

@item
eight mahā-kiriyacittas

@item
twelve rūpāvacara cittas (the rūpāvacara kusala cittas, vipākacittas
and kiriyacittas of the first, second, third and fourth stage of jhāna
(of the fivefold system)
@end itemize

thus, compassion can accompany twenty-eight types of citta

Sympathetic joy (muditā) can accompany the following cittas: 

@itemize

@item
eight mahā-kusala cittas

@item
eight mahā-kiriyacittas

@item
twelve rūpāvacara cittas
@end itemize

thus, sympathetic joy can accompany twenty-eight types of citta in
all.

Understanding (paññā) accompanies the following cittas:

@itemize

@item
four mahā-kusala cittas (those which are called: ñāṇa-sampayutta,
accompanied by understanding)

@item
four mahā-vipākacittas (ñāṇa-sampayutta)

@item
four mahā-kiriyacittas (ñāṇa-sampayutta)

@item
five rūpāvacara kusala cittas (of the five stages of rūpa-jhāna)

@item
five rūpāvacara vipākacittas

@item
five rūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@item
four arūpāvacara kusala cittas (of the four stages of arūpa-jhāna)

@item
four arūpāvacara vipākacittas

@item
four arūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@item
eight lokuttara cittas

@end itemize

Thus, understanding accompanies forty-seven types of citta in all:
twelve kāmāvacara cittas, fifteen rūpāvacara cittas, twelve
arūpāvacara cittas and eight lokuttara cittas

When forty lokuttara cittas are counted instead of eight, namely,
lokuttara cittas accompanied by the jhāna-factors of the five stages
of jhāna, there are seventy-nine cittas in all accompanied by
understanding. 

@node Stages of Insight
@chapter The Stages of Insight 



@section Three stages of ``tender insight'' (taruṇa vipassanā):
@itemize

@item
Defining of Nāma and Rūpa (nāma-rūpa-pariccheda ñāṇa)

@item
Discerning the Conditions of Nāma and Rūpa (paccaya-pariggaha ñāṇa)

@item
Investigation Knowledge or Comprehension by Groups (sammasana ñāṇa)
@end itemize

@section Eight Stages of Principal Insight (Mahā-Vipassanā ñāṇa):
@itemize
@item
Knowledge of the Arising and Falling Away of Nāma and Rūpa 
(udayabbhayā ñāṇa)

@item
Knowledge of Dissolution (bhanga ñāṇa)

@item
Knowledge of Terror (bhaya ñāṇa)

@item
Knowledge of Danger (ādīnava ñāṇa)

@item
Knowledge of Dispassion (nibbida ñāṇa)

@item
Knowledge of Desire for Deliverance (muccitukamyatā ñāṇa)

@item
Knowledge of Reflection (paṭisankhā ñāṇa)

@item
Knowledge of Equanimity about Saṅkhāra Dhammas (saṅkhārupekkhā ñāṇa)

@item
Adaptation Knowledge (anuloma ñāṇa)
@end itemize

@node Glossary
@chapter Glossary

@table @code

@item abhidhamma 
the higher teachings of Buddhism, teachings on
ultimate realities

@item abhijjā 
covetousness

@item abhiññā 
supernormal powers

@item abhisaṅkhāra 
kammic activity giving preponderance in the
conditioning of rebirth

@item adhimāna 
over-estimating conceit

@item adhimokkha 
determination or resolution

@item adhipatis 
``forerunners'' of the arising of the ariyan
eightfold Path:

@item adosa 
non aversion

@item adukkhamasukha 
neutral feeling

@item ahetuka cittas 
not accompanied by ``beautiful roots'' or unwholesome
roots

@item ahetuka kiriyacitta 
inoperative citta without root

@item ahetuka-diṭṭhi 
The view that here are no causes (in happening)

@item ahirika 
shamelessness

@item ājīva-duccarita 
virati abstinence from wrong livelihood

@item akiriya-diṭṭhi 
The view that there is no such thing as kamma

@item akusala kamma 
a bad deed

@item akusala citta 
unwholesome consciousness

@item akusala 
unwholesome, unskilful

@item alobha 
non attachment, generosity

@item amoha 
wisdom or understanding

@item an-aññātaññassāmī 't'indriya 
I-shall-come-to-know-the-unknown''
faculty, arising at the moment of the magga-citta of the sotāpanna

@item anāgāmī 
non returner, person who has reached the third stage of
enlightenment, he has no aversion (dosa)

@item Ānanda the chief attendant of the Buddha 

@item anantarika kamma 
heinous crimes

@item anattā 
not self

@item aññasamānā cetasikas 
Añña means ``other'' and samānā means ``common'',
the same. The aññasamānās which arise together are of the same jāti as
the citta they accompany and they all change, become ``other'', as
they accompany a citta of a different jāti. Akusala is ``other'' than
kusala and kusala is ``other'' than akusala.

@item aññātāvindriya 
The final knower faculty, arising at the moment of the
phala-citta of the arahat

@item aññindriya 
The faculty of final knowledge , which arises at the moment
of the phala-citta, fruition-consciousness, of the sotāpanna, and also
accompanies the magga-citta and the phala-citta of the sakadāgāmī and
of the anāgāmī and the magga-citta of the arahat

@item anottappa 
recklessness

@item anumodhanā 
thanksgiving, appreciation of someone else's kusala

@item anusayas 
latent tendency or proclivity

@item arahat 
noble person who has attained the fourth and last stage of
enlightenment

@item ārammaṇa 
object which is known by consciousness

@item ariyan 
noble person who has attained enlightenment

@item arūpa-bhūmi 
plane of arūpa citta

@item arūpa-brahma 
plane plane of existence attained as a result of
arūpa-jhāna. There are no sense impressions, no rūpa experienced in
this realm.

@item arūpa-jhāna 
immaterial absorption

@item arūpāvacara citta 
arūpa jhāna citta, consciousness of immaterial jhāna

@item asaññā-satta 
plane plane where there is only rūpa, not nāma

@item asaṅkhārika 
unprompted, not induced, either by oneself or by someone
else

@item asaṅkhata dhamma 
unconditioned reality, nibbāna

@item asappurisa 
a bad man 

@item āsavas 
influxes or intoxicants, group of defilements 

@item asura demon 
being of one of the unhappy planes of existence

@item atīta-bhavanga 
past life-continuum, arising and falling away shortly
before the start of a process of cittas experiencing an object through
one of the sense-doors

@item attavādupādāna 
clinging to personality belief 

@item Atthasālinī 
The Expositor, a commentary to the first book of the
Abhidhamma Piṭaka

@item avihiṁsa 
the thought of non-harming

@item avijjā 
ignorance

@item avijjāsava 
the canker of ignorance

@item avijjogha 
the flood of ignorance

@item avyāpāda 
the thought of non-malevolence

@item ayoniso manasikāra 
unwise attention to an object

@item balas powers
strengths

@item bhaṅga khaṇa 
dissolution moment of citta

@item bhaṅga khaṇa 
the dissolution moment of citta

@item bhava-taṇhā 
craving for existence

@item bhāvanā 
mental development, comprising the development of calm and the
development of insight

@item bhavanga calana 
vibrating bhavanga arising shortly before a process of
cittas experiencing an object through one of the six doors

@item bhavanga-citta 
life-continuum

@item bhavangupaccheda 
arrest bhavanga, last bhavanga-citta before a process
of cittas starts

@item bhavogha 
the flood of desire for rebirth

@item bhikkhu 
monk

@item bhikkhunī 
nun

@item bhūmi 
existence or plane of citta

@item bodhisatta 
a being destined to become a Buddha

@item bojjhangas 
factors of enlightenment,

@item Brahma 
heavenly being born in the Brahma world, as a result of the
attainment of jhāna

@item brahma-vihāras 
the four divine abidings, meditation subjects which
are: loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, equanimity

@item brahmavihāra-upekkhā 
equanimity, one of the ``divine abidings''

@item Buddha 
a fully enlightened person who has discovered the truth all by
himself, without the aid of a teacher

@item Buddhaghosa 
the greatest of Commentators on the Tipiṭaka, author of
the Visuddhimagga in 5 A.D

@item cakkhu 
eye

@item cakkhu-dhātu 
eye element

@item cakkhu-dvāra 
eyedoor

@item cakkhu-samphassa 
eye contact

@item cakkhu-vatthu 
eye-base

@item cakkhu-viññāṇa 
seeing-consciousness

@item cakkhuppasāda-rūpa 
eye-sense 

@item cetanā 
volition

@item cetasika 
mental factor arising with consciousness

@item chanda 
``wish to do''

@item citta 
consciousness, the reality which knows or cognizes an object

@item citta-kammaññatā 
wieldiness of citta

@item citta-lahutā 
lightness of citta

@item citta-mudutā 
pliancy of citta

@item citta-pāguññatā 
proficiency of citta

@item citta-passaddhi 
tranquillity of mind

@item citta-ujukatā 
uprightness of citta

@item cuti 
dying

@item cuti-citta 
dying-consciousness

@item dāna 
generosity, giving

@item deva 
heavenly being

@item dhamma 
reality, truth, the teachings

@item dhamma-vicaya 
investigation of Dhamma

@item Dhammasangaṇi 
the first book of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka

@item dhammavicaya 
investigation of the Dhamma 

@item diṭṭhāsava 
canker of wrong view

@item diṭṭhi 
wrong view, distorted view of realities

@item diṭṭhigata sampayutta 
accompanied by wrong view

@item diṭṭhigata-vippayutta 
attachment which is dissociated from wrong view

@item diṭṭhogha 
the flood of wrong view

@item diṭṭhupādāna 
clinging to wrong view

@item domanassa 
unpleasant feeling

@item dosa 
aversion or ill will 

@item dosa-mūla-citta citta 
(consciousness) rooted in aversion

@item dukkha 
suffering, unsatisfactoriness of conditioned realities

@item dukkha vedanā 
painful feeling or unpleasant feeling

@item dvāra 
doorway through which an object is experienced, the five
sense-doors or the mind door

@item dvi-pañca-viññāṇa 
the five pairs of sense-cognitions, which are
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and body-consciousness. Of each
pair one is kusala vipāka and one akusala vipāka

@item ekaggatā 
concentration, one-pointedness, a cetasika which has the
function to focus on one object

@item ganthas 
bonds, a group of defilements

@item gotrabhū 
change of lineage, the last citta of the sense-sphere before
jhāna, absorption, is attained, or enlightenment is attained

@item hasituppāda-citta 
smile producing consciousness of an arahat

@item hetu 
root, which conditions citta to be ``beautiful'' or unwholesome

@item hiri 
moral shame

@item hiriyati 
scruples

@item idaṃ-saccābhinivesa kāyagantha 
the bodily tie of dogmatism

@item idaṃ-saccābhinivesa 
the tie of dogmatism

@item iddhipādas 
four ``Roads to Success''

@item indriya 
faculty. Some are rūpas such as the sense organs, some are
nāmas such as feeling. Five 'spiritual faculties' are wholesome
faculties which should be cultivated, namely: confidence, energy,
awareness, concentration and wisdom.

@item issā 
envy

@item jāti 
birth, nature, class (of cittas)

@item javana 
impulsion, running through the object

@item javana-citta 
cittas which 'run through the object', kusala citta or
akusala citta in the case of non-arahats

@item jhāna 
absorption which can be attained through the development of calm

@item jhāna factors 
cetasikas which have to be cultivated for the attainment
of jhāna: vitakka, vicāra, pīti, sukha, samādhi

@item jhāna-cittas 
absorption consciousness attained through the development
of calm 

@item jīvitindriya 
life-faculty or vitality

@item kalyāṇa-mitta 
good friend in Dhamma 

@item kāma-sobhana 
cittas beautiful cittas of the sense sphere

@item kāma-taṇhā 
sensuous craving

@item kāma-vitakka 
thought of sense-pleasures 

@item kāmāvacara cittas 
cittas of the sense sphere

@item kāmāvacara sobhana cittas 
beautiful cittas of the sense sphere

@item kamma 
intention or volition; deed motivated by volition

@item kamma patha 
course of action performed through body, speech or mind
which can be wholesome or unwholesome

@item kāmogha 
the flood of sensuous desire

@item kāmupādāna 
sensuous clinging

@item karuṇā 
compassion

@item kāya 
body. It can also stand for the 'mental body', the cetasikas

@item kāya-duccarita virati 
abstinence from wrong action

@item kāya-ujukatā 
uprightness of cetasika

@item kāya-viññāṇa 
body-consciousness

@item khandhas 
aggregates of conditioned realities classified as five
groups: physical phenomena, feelings, perception or remembrance,
activities or formations (cetasikas other than feeling or perception),
consciousness.

@item khanti 
patience

@item kilesa 
defilements

@item kiriya citta 
inoperative citta, neither cause nor result

@item kukkucca 
regret or worry

@item kusala kamma 
a good deed

@item kusala 
wholesome, skilful

@item kusala citta 
wholesome consciousness

@item lakkhaṇaṃ 
characteristic, specific or generic attribute

@item lobha 
attachment, greed

@item lobha-mūla-citta 
consciousness rooted in attachment

@item lokiya citta 
citta which is mundane, not experiencing nibbāna

@item lokuttara citta 
supramundane citta which experiences nibbāna

@item lokuttara dhammas 
the unconditioned dhamma which is nibbāna and the
cittas which experience nibbāna

@item macchariya 
stinginess

@item magga 
path (eightfold Path)

@item magga-citta path consciousness, supramundane citta which experiences
nibbāna and eradicates defilements.

@item mahā kiriyacitta 
inoperative sense-sphere citta of the arahat,
accompanied by ``beautiful'' roots.

@item mahā vipākacitta 
citta of the sense sphere which is result,
accompanied by ``beautiful'' roots.

@item mahā-satipaṭṭhāna
four applications of mindfulness, see satipaṭṭhāna

@item mahā-vipassanā 
``principal insight'' 

@item manasikāra 
attention

@item mano-dvārāvajjana-citta 
mind-door-adverting-consciousness

@item māra 
the evil one

@item mettā 
loving kindness

@item micchā-diṭṭhi 
wrong view

@item micchā-samādhi 
wrong concentration 

@item middha 
torpor or languor

@item moha 
ignorance

@item moha-mūla-citta 
citta rooted in ignorance

@item moha-mūla-cittas 
cittas rooted in ignorance

@item muditā 
sympathetic joy

@item nāma kkhandha 
group of all mental phenomena

@item nāma 
mental phenomena,including those which are conditioned and also
the unconditioned nāma which is nibbāna.

@item nāma-rūpa pariccheda-ñāṇa 
first stage of insight, insight knowledge of
the distinction between mental phenomena and physical phenomena

@item natthika diṭṭhi 
wrong view of annihilation, assumption that there is
no result of kamma.

@item ñāṇa 
wisdom, insight

@item nekkhamma 
thought of renunciation

@item nibbāna 
unconditioned reality, the reality which does not arise and
fall away. The destruction of lust, hatred and delusion. The
deathless. The end of suffering.

@item nimitta mental image one can acquire of a meditation subject in
tranquil meditation

@item nīvaraṇa 
hindrances, a group of defilements

@item oghas 
group of defilements, the floods

@item ottappa 
fear of blame

@item paccaya-pariggaha-ñāṇa 
discerning the Conditions of Nāma and Rūpa

@item paccayas 
conditions 

@item paccupaṭṭhāna 
manifestation, appearance or effect

@item padaṭṭhānaṃ 
proximate cause

@item paṭicca sammuppada 
'Dependent Origination', the conditional
origination of phenomena

@item Paṭṭhāna 
Conditional Relations, one of the seven books of the
Abhidhamma

@item paṭisandhi citta 
rebirth consciousness

@item paṭisandhi 
rebirth

@item pakiṇṇakā 
the particulars

@item Pāli 
the language of the Buddhist teachings

@item pañcadvārāvajjana-citta 
five-sense-door-adverting-consciousness

@item pañcaviññāṇa (or dvi-pañcaviññāṇa)
the sense cognitions (seeing etc.)
of which there five pairs the sense cognitions (seeing etc.) of which
there five pairs

@item paññā 
wisdom or understanding

@item paññatti 
concepts, conventional terms

@item paramattha dhamma 
truth in the absolute sense: mental and physical
phenomena, each with their own characteristic. Nibbāna is

@item Paramattha Mañjūsā 
a commentary to the Visuddhimagga

@item pasāda-rūpas 
rūpas which are capable of receiving sense-objects such
as visible object, sound, taste, etc.

@item passaddhi 
calm

@item patisanthāro 
courtesy

@item peta 
ghost

@item phala-citta 
fruition consciousness experiencing nibbāna. It is result
of magga-citta, path-consciousness.

@item phassa 
contact

@item pīti 
joy, rapture

@item puñña-kiriya-vatthus 
``ten bases of meritorious deeds''

@item puthujjana 
``worldling'', a person who has not attained enlightenment

@item rāga 
greed

@item rasa 
function or achievement

@item rūpa 
physical phenomena, realities which do not experience anything

@item rūpa-brahma 
plane or rūpa-bhūmi fine material realm of existence
attained as a result of rūpa-jhāna

@item rūpa-jhāna 
fine material absorption, developed with a meditation
subject which is still dependant on materiality.

@item rūpa-jīvitindriya 
a kind of rūpa produced by kamma and it maintains
the life of the other rūpas it arises together with

@item rūpa-khandha 
aggregate or group of all physical phenomena (rūpas)

@item rūpāvacara citta 
type of jhāna citta

@item rūpāvacara cittas, rūpa-jhānacittas
consciousness of the fine-material
sphere

@item sabbacitta-sādhāranā 
the seven cetasikas which have to arise with
every citta

@item saddhā 
confidence

@item sahetuka 
accompanied by roots

@item sakadāgāmī 
once-returner, a noble person who has attained the second
stage of enlightenment

@item sakkāya diṭṭhi 
wrong view of personality, wrong view about the
khandhas

@item samādhi 
concentration or one-pointedness, ekaggatā cetasika

@item samādhi-bhāvanā 
the development of concentration

@item samañña lakkhaṇa 
general characteristics common to all conditioned
realities

@item samatha 
the development of calm

@item sambojjhanga 
seven factors of enlightenment

@item sammā 
right

@item sammā-diṭṭhi 
right understanding

@item sammā-samādhi 
right concentration

@item sammā-sambuddha 
a universal Buddha, a fully enlightened person who has
discovered the truth all by himself, without the aid of a teacher and
who can proclaim the Truth to others beings

@item sammā-saṅkappa 
right thinking of the eightfold Path

@item sammā-sati 
right mindfulness

@item sammā-vāyāma 
right mindfulness of the eightfold Path

@item sampaṭicchana-citta 
receiving-consciousness

@item sampajañña 
discrimination, comprehension

@item sampayutta 
associated with

@item sampayutta dhammas 
associated dhammas, citta and cetasika which arise
together

@item Sangha 
community of monks and nuns. As one of the triple Gems it means
the community of those people who have attained enlightenment.

@item sankhata dhammas 
conditioned dhammas

@item saññā 
memory, remembrance or ``perception''

@item saññā-kkhandha 
memory classified as one of the five khandhas

@item santīraṇa-citta 
investigating-consciousness

@item saṅkāra dhamma 
conditioned dhamma

@item saṅkhāra-kkhandha 
all cetasikas (mental factors) except feeling and
memory

@item saṅkhāradhamma 
conditioned realities

@item saṁsāra 
the cycle of birth and death

@item sappurisa 
good man 

@item Sāriputta 
The First chief disciple of the Buddha

@item sasaṅkhārika 
prompted, induced, instigated, either by oneself or
someone else

@item sati 
awareness, non-forgetfulness, awareness of reality by direct
experience

@item satipaṭṭhāna sutta 
Middle Length Sayings 1, number 10, also Dīgha
Nikāya, dialogues 11, no. 22; 

@item satipaṭṭhāna 
applications of mindfulness. It can mean the cetasika
sati which is aware of realities or the objects of mindfulness which
are classified as four applications of mindfulness: Body, Feeling
Citta, Dhamma. Or it can mean the development of direct understanding
of realities through awareness.

@item saṃyojanas 
The Fetters, a group of defilements

@item sīla 
morality in action or speech, virtue

@item sīlabbata-parāmāsā 
wrong practice

@item sīlabbatupādāna 
wrong practice, which is clinging to certain rules
(``rites and rituals'') in one's practice

@item sobhana (citta and cetasika) 
beautiful, accompanied by beautiful roots

@item sobhana hetus 
beautiful roots

@item sobhana kiriyacittas 
kiriyacittas accompanied by sobhana (beautiful)
roots

@item somanassa 
happy feeling

@item sotāpanna 
person who has attained the first stage of enlightenment,
and who has eradicated wrong view of realities

@item sukha 
happy, pleasant

@item sutta 
part of the scriptures containing dialogues at different places
on different occasions.

@item suttanta 
a sutta text

@item tadārammaṇa-cittas 
registering-consciousness

@item taruṇa vipassanā 
``tender insight'' 

@item Tathāgata 
literally ``thus gone'', epithet of the Buddha

@item tatramajjhattatā 
equanimity or evenmindedness

@item Theravāda Buddhism 
'Doctrine of the Elders', the oldest tradition of
Buddhism

@item thīna 
sloth

@item tiṭṭhi khaṇa 
the moment of its presence, or static moment of citta

@item Tipiṭaka 
the teachings of the Buddha

@item titthi khaṇa 
static moment of citta

@item uddhacca 
restlessness

@item uddhambhāgiya-saṃyojana 
five higher fetters which tie beings to the
higher planes of existence the rūpa-brahma planes and the arūpa-brahma
planes

@item ujupatipanno 
the straight, true and proper way

@item upacāra 
access or proximatory consciousness, the second javana-citta
in the process in which absorption or enlightenment is attained

@item upādāna 
clinging

@item upādānakkhandhas 
khandhas of clinging

@item upekkhā 
indifferent feeling. It can stand for evenmindedness or
equanimity and then it is not feeling

@item Uposatha 
Uposatha days are days of fasting or vigil; uposatha is
observed on the days of full-moon and new-moon, and sometimes also on
the days of the first and last moon-quarter. In Buddhist countries
there is a tradition for lay-followers to visit temples and to observe
eight precepts on these days

@item uppāda khaṇa 
the arising moment of citta

@item vaci-duccarita virati 
abstinence from wrong speech

@item vatthu 
base, physical base of citta

@item vedanā feeling

@item vedanā-kkhandha 
group of all feelings

@item Vibhaṅga 
``Book of Analysis'', one of the seven books of the
Abhidhamma

@item vibhava-taṇhā 
craving for non-existence

@item vicāra 
sustained thinking or discursive thinking

@item vicikicchā 
doubt

@item vihiṁsā-vitakka 
thought of harming

@item vinaya 
Book of Discipline for the monks

@item viññāṇa 
consciousness, citta

@item viññāṇa-kkhandha 
all cittas (consciousness)

@item vipākacitta 
citta which is the result of a wholesome deed (kusala
kamma) or an unwholesome deed (akusala kamma). It can arise as
rebirth-consciousness, or during life as the experience of pleasant or
unpleasant objects through the senses, such as seeing, hearing, etc.

@item vipallāsas 
perversions. Three kinds: saññā perversion of perception,
citta of thought, diṭṭhi of views.

@item vipassanā ñāṇa 
moment of insight knowledge

@item vipassanā 
wisdom which sees realities as they are

@item viriya 
energy

@item visaṇkāra dhamma 
unconditioned dhamma (reality)

@item Visuddhimagga 
an encyclopaedia of the Buddha's teaching, written by
Buddhaghosa in the fifth century A.D

@item vitakka 
applied thinking

@item vyāpāda 
ill-will

@item vyāpāda-vitakka 
thought of malevolence 

@item yoghas 
The yokes, a group of defilements

@item yoniso manasikāra 
wise attention to the object

@end table

@node Books
@unnumbered Books

@section Books written by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 

@item 
@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life} is an exposition of absolute realities
in detail. Abhidhamma means higher doctrine and the book's purpose
is to encourage the right application of Buddhism in order to eradicate
wrong view and eventually all defilements.

@item 
@emph{The Buddha's Path} An Introduction to the doctrine of Theravada
Buddhism for those who have no previous knowledge. The four noble
Truths - suffering - the origin of suffering - the cessation of suffering
- and the way leading to the end of suffering - are explained as a
philosophy and a practical guide which can be followed in today's world.
@item 
@emph{Buddhism in Daily Life} A general introduction to the main ideas
of Theravada Buddhism.The purpose of this book is to help the reader
gain insight into the Buddhist scriptures and the way in which the
teachings can be used to benefit both ourselves and others in everyday
life.

@item 
@emph{The World in the Buddhist Sense} The purpose of this book is to
show that the Buddha's Path to true understanding has to be developed
in daily life.
@item 
@emph{Cetasikas} Cetasika means 'belonging to the mind'. It is a mental
factor which accompanies consciousness (citta) and experiences an
object. There are 52 cetasikas. This book gives an outline of each
of these 52 cetasikas and shows the relationship they have with each
other.
@item 
@emph{The Buddhist Teaching on Physical Phenomena} A general introduction
to physical phenomena and the way they are related to each other and
to mental phenomena. The purpose of this book is to show that the
study of both mental phenomena and physical phenomena is indispensable
for the development of the eightfold Path. 

@item
@emph{The Conditionality of Life} By Nina van Gorkom

This book is an introduction to the seventh book of the Abhidhamma,
that deals with the conditionality of life. It explains the deep underlying
motives for all actions through body, speech and mind and shows that these are
dependent on conditions and cannot be controlled by a ‘self’. This book is suitable for those who have already made a study of
the Buddha’s teachings. 
@end itemize

@section Books translated by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 
@item 
@emph{Mettā: Loving kindness in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. An introduction to the basic
Buddhist teachings of mettā, loving kindness, and its practical application
in todays world.
@item 
@emph{Taking Refuge in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. Taking Refuge in Buddhism is an introduction
to the development of insight meditation.
@item 
@emph{A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas
is a guide to the development of the Buddha's path of wisdom, covering
all aspects of human life and human behaviour, good and bad. This
study explains that right understanding is indispensable for mental
development, the development of calm as well as the development of
insight.
@item 
@emph{The Perfections Leading to Enlightenment} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. The Perfections is a
study of the ten good qualities: generosity, morality, renunciation,
wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness, determination, loving-kindness,
and equanimity.

@end itemize
These and other articles can be seen at www.zolag.co.uk or www.scribd.com
(search for zolag).

@bye


