\input texinfo
@c $Id: bdl.texi,v 2.0 2014/01/04 19.35 alan Exp alan $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename BDL.info
@settitle Buddhism in Daily Life
@smallbook
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header 
@fonttextsize 10
@copying
Fourth edition published in 2014 by: @*
Zolag @*
32 Woodnook Road @*
Streatham @*
London @*
SW16 6TZ @*
www.zolag.co.uk @*

ISBN 978-1897633-28-1 @*
@copyright{Nina van Gorkom} @*



This work is licensed under the: @*
Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. @*
To view a copy of this license, visit: @*
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/ @*
or send a letter to: @*
Creative Commons, @*
171 Second Street, @*
Suite 300, @*
San Francisco, @*
California, @*
94105, USA.@*

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data @*
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library @*
Printed in the UK and USA by Lightningsource. @*
$Id: bdl.texi,v 2.0 2014/01/04 19.35 alan Exp alan $

@end copying
@setchapternewpage odd
@c @shorttitlepage Buddhism in Daily Life
@titlepage
@title Buddhism in Daily Life


@author Nina van Gorkom
Zolag 2014

Fourth Edition

@c The following two commands
@c start the copyright page.
@page

@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@ifnothtml
@contents
@end ifnothtml
@ifnottex

by Nina van Gorkom



This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco, California, 94105, USA.

$Id: bdl.texi,v 2.0 2014/01/04 19.35 alan Exp alan $
@node top
@top Contents

@end ifnottex
@menu
* Preface:: 
* General Aspects of Buddhism::
* Right Understanding in Daily Life:: 
* The Teaching of Dhamma::
* Wholesome Deeds::
* Mental Development::
* The Buddha::
* The Dhamma::
* The Sangha::
* Death::
* Life::
* The Development of Calm::
* Vipassanā::
* The Eightfold Path::
* Factors of the Eightfold Path::
* Right Effort::
* Right Mindfulness::
* Right Concentration::
* The Highest Blessings::
* Glossary::
@end menu


@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface

This book was written in Thailand where I lived for some years. When I
got to know the Thai people, I was impressed by their generosity. In
Thailand one meets many people who do not set a limit to their
generosity, be they rich or poor, and one is inspired to be more
generous oneself. When one meets the Thais one notices their sincerity,
their tolerance and their wise attitude towards the problems of life. I
was also impressed by the earnestness and dedication of the monks who
lead a life of simplicity, ``contented with little'', and who try to
realize the Buddhist teachings in their daily lives. When I visited the
temples in Thailand, I saw Buddhism being lived in daily life.

And so, I wanted to study Buddhism. We are inclined to think that
Buddhism is only a religion for people living in an oriental culture,
but when we learn more about it, we see that it is completely
different from what we first thought. We learn that it is in fact a
``way of life'' which makes for the well-being and happiness of all
people, no matter what their nationality.

Through the study of the Buddha's teachings, which are also called the
``Dhamma'', we learn to develop the wisdom which leads to detachment from
the ``self'' and finally to the eradication of greed, hatred and
ignorance. When there is less attachment in our life, there is more
room for unselfish loving kindness (mettā) and compassion
(karuṇā) for all living beings. 

The way one has to follow in order to develop this wisdom is the
``eightfold Path''. Through the development of the eightfold Path we come
to know better the phenomena within and around ourselves; these
phenomena can be experienced through the six doorways of eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, body-sense and mind. They are continually susceptible to
change and they are impermanent. What we take for ``I'' or ``self`` all the
time does not exist; there are only phenomena which arise and fall away
again.

In Thailand I experienced that ``to reside in a suitable location is the
greatest blessing'' (Mahā-Maṅgala Sutta). Thailand was the country where
I met the ``wise person'' who helped me to understand the Buddhist
teachings and who showed me the way to develop the eightfold Path. It
is a great blessing to live in a country where Buddhism is taught and
practised so that one can acquire not only theoretical knowledge of
Buddhism, but also the way leading to the realization of the Buddha's
teachings in daily life. 

The Buddha, who attained enlightenment and who had clear comprehension
of everything which is real, left us his teachings which are now in the
form of the Tipiṭaka (three ``baskets''), the three parts of the Buddhist
scriptures, consisting of the Vinaya, the Book of Discipline for the
monks, the Suttanta, Discourses, and the Abhidhamma, the ``higher
teachings'' or exposition of realities in detail. The Buddhist teachings
themselves should be our guide in the practice. Some people want to
apply themselves to ``meditation'' immediately without first studying the
teachings and thus they do not know which result their way of mental
development will bring. The Buddhist teachings are so subtle; one needs
to study them thoroughly and to consider them carefully in order to
understand what the Buddha taught about mental development. Mental
development includes both the development of calm (samatha) and the
development of insight (vipassanā), but they each have a different way
of practice and a different result. If one does not follow the Buddha's
way, but follows rather one's own or someone else's way, one cannot
reach the goal.

In this book I do not pretend to give a complete outline of the Buddha's
teachings. My purpose is to draw the reader to the Buddhist scriptures
themselves and to the practice in accordance with the teachings. I want
to ask the reader to read this book with discrimination and to
investigate for himself or herself what the Buddhist scriptures say. By
our own practice we can prove whether the way we follow is the right
one for the goal we have chosen. If we intend to develop insight,
vipassanā, the result should be that we gain more understanding of the
realities which appear at the present moment through the five senses
and the mind, and less clinging to the concept of ``self''. In the final
analysis, the reader will have to find out for himself and to decide
for himself about the path he wants to follow in his life.

I feel deep gratitude to Miss Sujin Boriharnwanaket who helped me to
understand the Buddhist teachings and who showed me the way to develop
vipassanā in daily life. The writing of this book would not have been
possible without her help and valuable advice. 

Buddhism in Daily Life originated from a compilation of lectures for a
Buddhist radio programme in English which were printed and reprinted in
Thailand several times. Formerly this book was printed in two volumes
with the titles Buddhist Outlook on Daily Life (now Part I) and Mental
Development in Daily Life (now Part II). Jonathan Abbot and Susie
Whitmore were of great assistance in preparing the text of these two
volumes. This present edition has been reprinted in England after there
were some requests from English people. I want to acknowledge my
appreciation to the ``Dhamma Study and Propagation Foundation''; to the
sponsors of the printing of this edition, Asoka Jayasundera and family,
Anura Perrera and family and Laksham Perera and family; and to the
publisher Alan Weller. Thanks to their assistance the reprinting of
this book has been made possible. I wrote Buddhism in Daily Life a long
time ago and I have since written Abhidhamma in Daily Life, The World
in the Buddhist Sense, and The Buddha's Path. The last book gives a
more complete outline of the Buddha's teachings for people in Western
countries who may not have had an opportunity to study Buddhism and who
may find it difficult to grasp the core of the teachings. Buddhism in
Daily Life reflects my own experiences when I first came into contact
with Buddhism in Thailand and became deeply impressed by the Buddha's
teachings. 

For the quotations from the Buddhist scriptures, I have used mostly the
English translation of the Pāli Text Society@footnote{The translations
are available at the Pāli Text Society, 73 Lime Walk, Headington,
Oxford OX3 7AD, England.}. For the quotations from the Path of
Purification (Visuddhimagga), I have used the translation by Bhikkhu
Ñāṇamoli (Colombo, Sri Lanka, 1964). The Path of Purification is
an Encyclopedia on Buddhism which is a compilation of ancient
commentarial material arranged by the commentator Buddhaghosa in the
fifth century A.D. 

The chapters which I wrote in the form of question and answer were
inspired by real questions posed by people who were confronted with
many problems in the practice of vipassanā. They were posed by myself
as well. I found from my own experience that the practice of vipassanā
is very subtle; that the clinging to the notion of ``self'' and the
desire for results can easily lead us astray, that they can cause us to
follow the wrong path instead of the right path. 

When I wrote Buddhism in Daily Life I thought of the many people who
want to know the truth about themselves. I find Dhamma the greatest
blessing in life and I want to share with others what I learnt from the
Buddhist teachings and from the practice of the Dhamma in daily life. I
hope that this book can help others to find the Path that leads to real
peace.

May the Dhamma be the greatest blessing in our lives, 

@sp 1

Nina van Gorkom

@node General Aspects of Buddhism
@chapter General Aspects of Buddhism

@emph{Questioner:} What led you to the study of the Buddha's teachings?

@emph{Nina:} When I first came to Thailand I was naturally interested in
knowing more about the Thai people. I wanted to learn more about their
customs and their way of thinking. I found the study of Buddhism
essential for the understanding of the Thai culture because the
spiritual background of the Thai people is Buddhism.

Therefore I started to study Buddhism and the more I studied, the more I
found my interest growing. When one is in Thailand one should take the
opportunity to study Buddhism and to try to understand the practice of
Buddhism as well. Deep understanding will not come from books alone.
Understanding is developed above all by the practice, by the
application of the Buddhist teachings in daily life!

@emph{Question:} Would you tell me what you mean by the practice of Buddhism in
daily life?

@emph{Nina:} One is first confronted with the practice of Buddhism when one
sees different customs of the Thais, such as giving food to the monks,
paying respect to the Buddha image or reciting the ``precepts'' on
special occasions such as ``Uposatha Day''@footnote{A day of vigil or
fasting which laypeople may observe four times a month (the days of the
new moon, full moon and the two days of the half moon) by undertaking
moral precepts and by visiting the temple.}. 

In the beginning I thought that these customs were mixed with many
things which are not essential for the practice of Buddhism. For
example, I did not see how the presenting of eggs to the statue of the
``Emerald Buddha'' could have anything to do with the practice of
Buddhism. However, even such popular beliefs can teach us something
about the practice of Buddhism.

There are many levels of understanding the Buddha's teachings. The
people who present eggs to the statue of the Buddha express their
confidence in him. This is a wholesome act which will bear its fruit
accordingly. However, the people who present the eggs may not realize
that it is their respect to the Buddha which will bring them a good
result and not the eggs presented to him. They may not clearly see
which cause will bring them which result. They would receive greater
benefit from their act of paying respect to the Buddha if this were
done in a more meaningful way. They could, for example, pay respect to
the Buddha by abstaining from ill deeds, in serving other people, in
learning more about the teachings of the Buddha and in helping other
people to understand the teachings as well. 

@emph{Question:} Could you tell me more about the different degrees of
understanding the Buddha's teaching?

@emph{Nina:} As regards paying respect to the Buddha image, people who have a
higher level of understanding know that the Buddha has passed away
completely. When one has studied the teachings more deeply and when one
has tried to verify them in daily life, one understands that, although
the Buddha has passed away, it still makes sense to pay respect to him.
It is the wholesome mental state of the person who pays respect to the
Buddha or who offers something to him which will bring its result
accordingly. Every good action brings a good result to the person who
performs it. One reaps what one has sown. 

The person who pays respect to the Buddha with the right understanding
does not have a confused idea of a Buddha in heaven who could see him
or hear him. The image of the Buddha reminds him of the virtues of the
Buddha. He thinks of the wisdom of the Buddha who found the Path to
complete freedom from sorrow all by himself and who was able to help
other people as well to find this Path. He thinks of the purity of the
Buddha, of the purity in all his deeds, his speech and his thoughts. He
thinks of the compassion of the Buddha, who taught out of compassion
for everybody.

@emph{Question:} What is the meaning of giving food to the monks?

@emph{Nina:} As regards the giving of food to the monks, some people doubt
whether that is of any use. They are inclined to think that monks want
to have an easy life and that they do not have to work at all, but they
forget that the real meaning of being a monk is seeking the truth.

A monk's life is a hard life, he does not have a family life, he cannot
choose his own food and he does not take part in any entertainment such
as going to the movies or football matches. He renounces the luxuries
of a home, entertainment, choice of clothing and food, in order to seek
the truth and to help other people to find the truth as well.

When people give food to the monks their act is one which will be
fruitful for both parties. The giver will benefit from his act because
he has a wholesome mental state at the time of giving: when there is
generosity there is no greed or attachment. The receiver will benefit
from the act of the giver because he is encouraged to study and
practise the Buddhist teachings more earnestly and to help other people
to know the teachings as well. He knows that the food he receives puts
him under an obligation to be worthy of the gift, to work for the
spiritual welfare of the whole world. Monks are continually reminded of
their responsibility as monks, and twice a month they recite the rules
of ``Pāṭimokkha'' in which their obligations are summed up. Furthermore,
when the receiver is aware of the wholesome state of the giver, he will
rejoice in the good deeds of the giver and thus he will have a
wholesome mental state as well; he will be inspired by the generosity
of the giver.

@emph{Question:} Do you not find it difficult to think in terms of ``mental
states''? Thinking of one's own mental state might seem an egocentric
attitude.

@emph{Nina:} Thinking of one's own mental states is very realistic, because it
is the different mental states which make us act in this way or that.
Only if we study our mental states and the many factors which cause
them to be like this or that, will we be able to understand the deepest
motives of our behaviour. We have to start by being aware of our own
mental states. This is not egocentric, because we have to understand
ourselves first, before we can understand other people. 

Through the study of the Abhidhamma one can begin to have more
understanding of one's own mental states. The Abhidhamma is that part
of the Buddhist teachings which analyses the different states of mind
and which explains in detail about everything which is real. The study
of the Abhidhamma helps us to understand which causes bring which
effects in our life and in the lives of other people.

@emph{Question:} Do you find that you can verify the Abhidhamma in your daily
life?

@emph{Nina:} It was a great discovery for me to find that the Abhidhamma can be
verified in daily life, although one can in the beginning experience
only part of the realities the Abhidhamma explains.

At first one might think that the Abhidhamma is too subtle and one might
doubt whether it is useful to study the many different degrees of
ignorance and wisdom, but one learns that each of these different
degrees brings its corresponding result.

In studying the Abhidhamma one learns to understand more about other
people as well. One learns that people are different because of
different accumulations of experiences in the past. Because of these
different accumulations people behave differently. At each moment one
accumulates new experiences and this conditions what one will be like
and what one will experience in the future. 

When we understand more about the different accumulations of different
people, we are less inclined to judge other people. When we see people
paying respect to the Buddha with apparently very little understanding
we know that their accumulations are thus and that they are performing
a wholesome act according to their ability.

@emph{Question:} Do you think that a person with very little understanding can
ever reach a level of higher understanding? In other words, when one's
accumulations have conditioned one's character, is there anything that
can be done about it? Is it possible to improve one's degree of
understanding?

@emph{Nina:} Everything can be done about it: wisdom can be developed very
gradually and thus one's accumulations can be changed. Those who have a
higher level of understanding can and should help other people to
develop a higher level of understanding as well.

I shall give an example. Children can become novices. They share the
life of the monks in order to learn more about the Buddhist teachings
and to make merit for their parents who can rejoice in their good
deeds. Many people think that the person who makes merit can literally
transfer his own good deeds to other people, dead or alive. This is not
the right understanding. It is not possible to transfer merit to other
people, because everyone will receive the result of his own deeds.
Older monks who have reached a higher level of understanding can help
the novices to have more understanding about the wholesome act they are
performing. If they could understand correctly the meaning of the merit
they make, their renunciation would be even more fruitful. The novices
are performing a very wholesome act in renouncing the company of their
relatives in order to study the Buddhist teachings and to train
themselves in the precepts, which are moral rules. This gives them a
good spiritual foundation for their whole life. They will receive the
fruit of this wholesome act themselves. The merit they make cannot
literally be transferred to other people. However, other people, no
matter whether they are deceased or still alive, can have wholesome
states of mind inspired by the good deeds of someone else. Their own
wholesome mental states will bring them a wholesome result. So parents,
even deceased parents, if they are in planes of existence where they
can rejoice in the good deeds of their child, may have wholesome states
of mind and these will bring wholesome results in the future. The
expression ``transfer of merit'' is a misleading one, because it does not
give us the understanding of the real cause and effect.

@emph{Question:} You used the expression ``mental state''. Could you explain what
it means? I would like to ask you in general whether you find the
English language adequate to render the real meaning of the realities
which are described in the Abhidhamma.

@emph{Nina:} The English language is not adequate to render the meaning of the
realities described in the Abhidhamma. The ``Three Collections'' of the
teachings (Tipiṭaka) use Pāli terms, and therefore it is better to
learn the Pāli terms and their meaning. For instance, the word ``mental
state'' which is a translation of the Pāli term ``citta''@footnote{
Pronounce: chitta.}, is misleading. ``State'' implies something which
stays for some time, be it short or long. However, each mental state or
citta falls away immediately, as soon as it has arisen, to be succeeded
by the next citta. This happens more rapidly than a lightning flash.
The different cittas succeed one another so rapidly that it seems that
there is only one citta. That is the reason why people take a citta for
``self''. 

For the same reason the word ``mind'' gives us a wrong idea of reality. We
often hear the expression ``mastering one's mind'' or ``controlling one's
mind''. Many people think that the mind is something static which can be
grasped and controlled. There are many different cittas, none of which
can be considered as ``self'' or as belonging to a ``self''.

In the Lesser Discourse to Saccaka (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 35) we
read that the Buddha asked Saccaka whether he could be master of his
body or of his mind, just as a king rules over his subjects. The Buddha
asked: ``When you speak thus: 'The body is myself,' have you power over
this body of yours (and can you say), 'Let my body be thus, let my body
be not thus'?'' The Buddha asked the same question about the mind.
Saccaka who was at first silent finally had to agree that it was not
possible. 

In daily life we can find out that the Buddha spoke the truth. If we
were masters of our body we would not grow older, there would not be
sickness and we would not die. However, old age, sickness and death are
unavoidable.

Neither can we be masters of our mind; the mental states which arise are
beyond control. Like and dislike are beyond control, they arise when
there are conditions. When we eat food which is prepared to our taste,
we cannot help liking it. If someone insults us, we cannot help feeling
aversion; we may reason later and try to understand the other person,
but we cannot help feeling aversion at first. Like, dislike, and even
reasoning about our likes and dislikes, are not ``self'', they are
different mental states which arise when there are the right
conditions. 

We all are inclined to take mental states for ``self''; for example, when
we enjoy something we take our enjoyment for ``self''. However, the next
moment there could be aversion, and we might wonder where the enjoyment
which we took for ``self'' has gone. 

It is very human to like the idea of a ``self'' and to hold on to it. The
Buddha knew this and therefore, after his enlightenment, he felt for a
moment inclined not to teach other people the Path he had found.
However, the Buddha knew also that people have different levels of
understanding. We read in the Kindred Sayings (I, Ch. VI, The Brahmā
Suttas, Ch. 1, par 1, The Entreaty) that the Buddha surveyed the world
with his ``Buddha-vision'' and saw people with different levels of
understanding, some of whom would be able to understand his teaching:

As in a pool of blue or red or white lotus, some lotus plants born in
the water, emerge not, but grow up and thrive sunken beneath the
surface; and other lotus plants, born in the water and growing up in
the water rise to the surface; and other lotus plants, born in the
water and growing up in the water, stand thrusting themselves above the
water and are unwetted by it; even so did the Exalted One look down
over the world with a Buddha's Eye and see beings whose eyes were
scarcely dimmed by dust, beings whose eyes were sorely dimmed by dust,
beings sharp of sense and blunted of sense, beings of good and beings
of evil disposition, beings docile and beings indocile, some among them
living with a perception of the danger of other worlds@footnote{Namely
in rebirth.} and of wrong doing.

Therefore the Buddha decided to make known the Path he had discovered.

@emph{Question:} People have different accumulations. They are conditioned in
many ways. We have used the word ``condition'' several times already.
Could you explain the meaning of this term?

@emph{Nina:} I will give an example from daily life. My husband comes home from
his office, feeling tired and somewhat irritated. I tell him something
amusing which has happened and he laughs and feels happy again. Thus
one can notice that there are different cittas@footnote{Moment of
consciousness or ``mental state''.}, and that each citta has its own
conditions. The amount of work at the office is a condition for my
husband's tiredness and irritation. Afterwards there is another
condition which makes him feel happy again.

Cittas are conditioned and each citta accumulates a new experience,
which will condition cittas in the future. Everybody accumulates
different tastes, abilities, likes and dislikes. One cannot always know
the conditions which make people behave in this or in that way, but
sometimes it is possible to know. For instance, people are addicted to
different things, some of which are very harmful, others less so. One's
education and the surroundings in which one is living can be a
condition for these addictions. In some countries or regions it is the
custom to drink an enormous amount of coffee the whole day and people
even give coffee to very small children. Thus one acquires the taste
for coffee from one's youth. As regards attachment to alcoholic drinks,
there must be a condition for that as well. One starts with a little
drink every day and gradually one's attachment increases.

Everybody should find out for himself how much attachment he accumulates
and whether this brings him happiness or sorrow.

@emph{Question:} There is not anything which one can control. Even each citta
which arises because of conditions falls away immediately, to be
succeeded by the next citta. It seems as if the situation is hopeless.
Could you tell me whether something can be done to walk the right way
in life?

@emph{Nina:} The situation is not hopeless. Wisdom, the understanding of
reality, can condition one to have more wholesome mental states and to
do good deeds.

There is no ``self'' who can suppress one's bad inclinations; there is no
``self'' who can force one to do good deeds. Everybody can verify this in
daily life. For example, if we tell ourselves: ``today I will be very
kind to everybody'', can we prevent ourselves from suddenly saying an
unkind word? Most of the time it has happened before we realize it.

If we are able to suppress our anger for a while we are inclined to
think that there is a ``self'' who can suppress anger. In reality there
are at that moment cittas which are not conditioned by anger, but which
arise from other conditions. Afterwards there will be anger again
because anger is not really eradicated by suppression. Only wisdom,
seeing things as they are, can very gradually eradicate everything
which is unwholesome in us.

We can develop this wisdom step by step. Even wisdom is not ``self''; it
can only arise when there are the right conditions. We can develop
wisdom by knowing through direct experience the mental phenomena and
physical phenomena in and around ourselves. When we have realized that
none of these mental and physical phenomena stays or is permanent, we
will understand that we cannot take any phenomenon for ``self''. 

The Buddha explained to his disciples that it is ``comprehending'', seeing
things as they are, which will eradicate unwholesomeness. When we are
still learning to develop wisdom and when we notice that we have
unwholesome cittas, we are troubled about it, we have aversion because
of it. He whose wisdom is developed, has right understanding of his
life. He knows that there is no ``self'', and that everything arises
because of conditions. Thus he is not troubled, he is simply aware of
the present moment.

The word ``comprehending'' is used in the suttas many times. This should
help us to see that we do not have to perform extraordinary deeds; we
should learn to be aware of the present moment in order to see things
as they are. Of course wisdom cannot be fully developed in one day. For
a long time we have been used to the idea of ``self''. In conventional
language we have to use the words ``I'' and ``self'' continually in order
to make ourselves understood.

@emph{Question:} So wisdom is wholesome, and not understanding things as they
are is unwholesome and brings unhappiness. Do you find that you can
verify this in daily life?

@emph{Nina:} Yes. I will give an example. We are constantly taking our body for
``self'', although we know that it does not last. Thus, when we suffer
from sickness or pain, or when we become old, we attach so much
importance to these facts that we feel quite oppressed by them. If one
of our sense-organs does not function or if we become an invalid, we
feel we are the most unhappy person in the world. Attachment to our
body only brings sorrow, whereas if we would see things as they are,
there would be less sorrow for us. 

If one wants to see the body as it really is, one should distinguish the
body from mentality. It is true that in this world body and mentality
condition each other. However, one should know the different
characteristics of each, so that they can be experienced as they are.

The same elements which constitute dead matter constitute the body as
well. Both dead matter and the body are composed of the element of
earth or solidity, the element of water or cohesion, the element of
fire or temperature and the element of wind or motion@footnote{These
terms do not stand for the conventional ideas of earth, water, fire and
wind, but they denote characteristics of realities.}. One is inclined
to think: ``Is there not a soul which makes the body alive and is the
body therefore not different from dead matter?'' There is no soul; there
are only physical phenomena and mental phenomena which arise and fall
away all the time. We are not used to distinguishing the body from the
mind and analysing them as to what they really are. However, this is
necessary if we want to know reality. 

The body itself does not know anything; in this respect it is the same
as dead matter. If we can see that the body is only a composition of
physical phenomena which arise and fall away completely, and not
``self'', and that the mind is a series of mental phenomena which arise
and fall away and not ``self'', the veil of ignorance will fall from our
eyes.

If we try to develop this understanding we can see for ourselves what
the result is. We can find out whether this understanding brings us
more freedom from attachment or not. Attachment brings sorrow.

The Buddha taught people to see things as they are. We do not have to
fast or to be an ascetic. It is our duty to look after the body and to
feed it. The Buddha taught the ``Middle Way'': one does not have to force
oneself to undertake difficult practices, but on the other hand one
should learn through right understanding to become detached from the
things in an around oneself. Just understanding, seeing things as they
are, that is the ``Middle Way''. 

@emph{Question:} So, seeing things as they are is the practice of vipassanā,
insight. Most people think that it is a complicated form of meditation
which can be learnt only in a meditation centre. That is the reason why
most people will not even try it. But from our conversation it appears
that vipassanā is seeing the things of our daily life as they are. Do
you find that one has to have much theoretical knowledge before one
starts the practice of vipassanā?

@emph{Nina:} The word ``meditation'' frightens many people; they think that it
must be very complicated. But in reality one does not have to do
anything special. If one wants to develop vipassanā one needs some
theoretical knowledge. One does not have to know about all physical
elements and mental elements in detail, but one should know that the
body is made up of physical elements and that these are different from
mental elements. There are many different physical elements and these
elements are continually changing. One should know that there are many
different mental elements: one citta arises and falls away, then the
next citta arises and falls away. Cittas arise and fall away
successively, one at a time. Seeing is one citta, hearing is another
citta, thinking is again another citta, they are all different cittas.

Developing vipassanā does not mean that one has to be aware of all those
different elements at each moment; that would not be possible. Nor does
one have to do anything special; one can perform all the activities of
one's daily life. One gradually begins to understand that there are
only physical phenomena and mental phenomena and one begins to be aware
of these phenomena quite naturally, without having to force oneself,
because they are there all the time.

When we understand that these phenomena can be known as they are only
through direct awareness of them, awareness will arise by itself little
by little. We will experience that awareness will arise when there are
the right conditions. It does not matter if there is not a great deal
of awareness in the beginning. It is important to understand that
awareness is not ``self'' either, but a mental phenomenon which arises
when there are the right conditions. We cannot force awareness to
arise.

In understanding more about physical phenomena and mental phenomena, and
in being aware of them in daily life, wisdom will develop. Thus there
will be more wholesomeness and less unwholesomeness.

@emph{Question:} Do you find that awareness in this way brings you happiness?

@emph{Nina:} When there is understanding of what things really are, there will
be more wholesomeness in our life. There will be less clinging to the
concept of ``self'' when we perform good deeds, and thus good deeds will
be purer. We do not refrain from evil things because we have to follow
certain rules, but because we have more understanding as to which
causes bring which effects. 

The right understanding of what things are will very gradually eradicate
unwholesomeness. When there is less unwholesomeness there will be more
peace in life.

Everybody should verify this for himself!

@node Right Understanding in Daily Life 
@chapter Right Understanding in Daily Life 

What is the effect of the Buddha's teachings on people's actions? In
what way could the Buddha's teachings effectively help people to
perform wholesome deeds? Is it possible to do good deeds because a
person with authority tells us: ``Be detached and do good deeds''?

From experience we know that a good example might help to some extent,
but the source of the good deeds is within ourselves: our mentality
determines our actions. If someone wants to do his utmost to help other
people he should understand himself first. He should understand the
causes which make him act in this or in that way. If he develops right
understanding of these causes he will be able to lead a more wholesome
life and to help other people in the most effective way. 

Mentality is the source from which deeds spring; it is therefore not
possible to determine the degree of wholesomeness from the outward
appearance of deeds alone. There are many gradations of wholesomeness
depending on the mentality which motivates a good deed.

Some people give money to needy people, but that does not mean that
there may not still be conceit or other selfish motives. Others give
without conceit, but they may still have attachment: they give only to
people they like. There are people who give out of pure
loving-kindness, without any thought of attachment. This is a more
wholesome way of giving. 

We may wonder whether the study of so many details is necessary. In
daily life we will see that it is very helpful to know the different
kinds of citta and to know which citta motivates which kind of action.
Cittas change all the time, succeeding each other very rapidly. If we
learn to distinguish different kinds of citta, we will see that even
while we are performing a wholesome deed, unwholesome cittas can
follow very closely upon the wholesome cittas. 

``Wholesome'' is the translation of the Pāli term ``kusala''. A wholesome
deed in its widest sense means a deed which brings no harm to oneself
nor to other people at the moment the deed is done or later on.

In the Discourse on the Foreign Cloth (Middle Length Sayings II, no. 88)
we read about wholesome deeds, wholesome speech and wholesome thoughts.
King Pasenadi questions Ānanda about the nature of unwholesome
and wholesome deeds. As to wholesome or ``skilled'' bodily conduct we
read the following conversation:

@quotation
``But what, revered sir, is skilled bodily conduct?''
``Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that has no blemish.''
``But what, revered sir, is the bodily conduct that has no
blemish?'' ``Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that is
non-injurious.'' ``And what, revered sir, is the bodily
conduct that is non-injurious?'' ``Whatever the bodily
conduct, sire, that is joyous in result.'' ``And what,
revered sir, is the bodily conduct that is joyous in
result?'' ``Whatever bodily conduct, sire, does not conduce
to the torment of self and does not conduce to the torment
of others and does not conduce to the torment of both, and
by which the unskilled states dwindle away, the skilled
states increase much@enddots{}''
@end quotation

The same is said about wholesome speech and wholesome thinking. These
words render the meaning of wholesome or ``kusala'' in its widest sense.
There are many kinds and intensities of kusala. In developing ``right
understanding'' or wisdom there can be kusala of a higher degree. 

Wisdom or understanding is a translation of the Pāli term ``paññā ''. Paññā
does not only mean knowledge acquired from the study of books, paññā 
also includes insight, right understanding of the realities of daily
life. Paññā can be developed in daily life. When paññā accompanies
kusala citta, wholesome citta, there is a higher degree of
wholesomeness. There are many degrees of paññā and each degree brings
its result accordingly.

It is a typical Buddhist approach to investigate and to be aware of the
different mental phenomena and physical phenomena which can be
experienced through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. If
one is not used to this approach one might feel somewhat bewildered at
first. However, after we have investigated more these mental and
physical phenomena, we will find out that only thus it is possible to
understand the different ways in which we ourselves and other people
behave, and to know which causes bring which effects in life. It makes
no sense to speak in vague, general terms about realities, because the
real understanding of our experiences in life can never be developed in
that way.

Someone told me about a monk who was preaching in a way which was of
great help to people in their daily lives. When I asked what the monk
was preaching, the answer was that he was speaking about ``citcai''.
``Citcai''@footnote{Pronounce: chitchai.} is the word in Thai for
``state of mind'', in Pāli: citta. This monk had the right approach to
life. One should follow the example of the Buddha; one should not only
tell people to do good deeds, but one should teach them as well how to
do good deeds. In order to know how to do good deeds, we should go back
to the source of the good deeds: the mental states or ``cittas''. It is
preferable to use the Pāli term ``citta'' rather than a translation from
the Pāli since translations do not render the meaning of the terms
adequately. For example, the English translation of ``citta'' as ``state
of mind'' or ``mental state'' implies something which stays, which does
not change. But this is not the characteristic of citta. When we have
learned more about cittas we will find out that there is no citta which
stays, even for a second. Each citta which arises falls away
immediately, to be succeeded by the next citta. Cittas determine our
life and the lives of other people; they condition the actions we
perform in life.

Many people are not used to this approach; they are used to looking at
the outward appearance of things. Scientists are very advanced in the
study of outer space, but little is known about what goes on inwardly
in man. People are used to paying attention to the things they see and
hear, but they are not used to attending to seeing-consciousness and to
hearing-consciousness. They do not think of the cittas which perform
the functions of seeing and hearing.

Seeing-consciousness and hearing-consciousness are realities and
therefore it is important to know more about them. That part of the
Buddhist teachings which analyses and explains in detail mental
phenomena and physical phenomena is called the ``Abhidhamma''. The
Abhidhamma deals with everything which is real. Studying the Abhidhamma
can change one's life. 

Many Thais listen to lectures about Abhidhamma, and not only those who
have been educated at a college or university, but also those who have
never received a higher education. I have heard of cases in which the
study of different cittas has helped people to lead a more wholesome
life. I heard of someone who was at first inclined to have feelings of
revenge towards other people, but who was gradually able to overcome
those feelings by understanding what those feelings were. Many Thais
know about the realities taught in the Abhidhamma, and they are able to
apply their knowledge in daily life. Foreigners do not usually hear
about this because people do not often speak about Abhidhamma to
foreigners.

Unwholesome mental states or ``akusala cittas'' and wholesome mental
states or ``kusala cittas'' are realities of daily life. In order to know
more about these realities we should try to understand ourselves first:
if we do not understand ourselves we cannot help other people. This
does not mean, however, that we have to wait our whole life before we
can start helping other people. Even those who are just beginning to
understand things as they are can help others to have right
understanding too. 

Paññā, wisdom or understanding, is the opposite of ignorance, the root
of all defilement and sorrow. Paññā is important for the development of
kusala cittas. It is possible to do good deeds without paññā , but if
there is understanding of what is unwholesome and what is wholesome,
and understanding of what the result is of unwholesome and wholesome
deeds, one is able to lead a more wholesome life. Thus, the development
of paññā is of great benefit both to ourselves and to others. 

There are many degrees of paññā . When a teacher explains to his pupils
that kusala cittas with gratitude or honesty will bring a pleasant
result and that unwholesome deeds motivated by greed or anger will
bring an unpleasant result, the explanation may be the condition for
them to have some degree of paññā . With paññā they may be able to
develop kusala cittas and to perform more wholesome deeds.

There is a higher degree of paññā when people realize the impermanence
of all the things they enjoy in life. When people see how short human
life is, they will try not to be attached too much to the pleasant
things of life. This understanding will stimulate them to a greater
generosity and to more readiness to help other people. They will be
less selfish.

Some people who have this degree of paññā might change their way of life
and live contentedly without any luxury. Others might decide to ``go
forth from home into homelessness''; they might decide to become a monk.
A monk's life is not an easy life. He lives without family and is one
who is ``contented with little''. In the Discourse on the Sixfold
Cleansing (Middle Length Sayings III, no. 112) we read that the Buddha
spoke about the monk who told of his renunciation of the world:

@quotation
``So I, your reverences, after a time, getting rid of my wealth, whether
small or great, getting rid of my circle of relations, whether small or
great, having cut off my hair and beard, having put on saffron robes,
went forth from home into homelessness@enddots{}''
@end quotation

The Buddha explained that people are too much attached to the
sense-impressions received through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and body.
He spoke about the ``five strands of sense-pleasures''. We read in the
Discourse with Subha (Middle Length Sayings II, no. 99) that the Buddha
spoke with Subha about the five strands of sense-pleasures:

@quotation
@dots{}These five, brahman youth, are the strands of pleasures of the
senses. What five? Material shapes cognizable by the eye, agreeable,
pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, alluring.
Sounds cognizable by the ear@dots{}Smells cognizable by the nose@dots{}Tastes
cognizable by the tongue@dots{}Touches cognizable by the body, agreeable,
pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, alluring.
These, brahman youth, are the five strands of sense-pleasures. Brahman
youth, the brahman Pokkharasāti of the Upama––a (clan) of the Subhaga
forest glade, is enslaved and infatuated by these five strands of
sense-pleasures, he is addicted to them, and enjoys them without seeing
the peril (in them), without knowing the escape (from them)@enddots{}
@end quotation

We would like to have pleasant sense-impressions and we are inclined to
attach too much importance to them. We are so absorbed in what we see
or hear that we forget that sense-impressions are not true happiness.
In the Discourse to Māgandiya (Middle Length Sayings II, no. 75) we
read that the Buddha said to Māgandiya:

@quotation
Now I, Māgandiya, when I was formerly a householder, endowed and
provided with the five strands of sense-pleasures, revelled in them@enddots{}
But after a time, having known the coming to be and passing away of
sense-pleasures and the satisfaction and peril of them and the escape
as it really is, getting rid of the craving for sense-pleasures,
suppressing the fever for sense-pleasures, I dwelt devoid of thirst, my
mind inwardly calmed. I saw other beings not yet devoid of attachment
to sense-pleasures who were pursuing sense-pleasures (although) they
were being consumed by craving for sense-pleasures, burning with the
fever for sense-pleasures. I did not envy them: I had no delight
therein@enddots{}
@end quotation

People who understand that there is a higher happiness than the
pleasures which one can enjoy through the five senses might apply
themselves to the development of calm or ``samatha''. The calm which is
developed in samatha is temporary freedom from attachment, anger and
other defilements. There are several meditation subjects of samatha,
such as recollection of the Buddha's virtues, mindfulness of breathing
or loving-kindness. It depends on a person's accumulations which
subject conditions calm for him. Samatha is not a matter of just trying
to concentrate on an object. Most important is right understanding of
the meditation subject and of the way to attain the calm which is
wholesome by means of the meditation subject. If one does not know the
difference between kusala citta and akusala citta one is likely to take
attachment to silence for kusala and then samatha cannot be developed.
One has to know the characteristic of calm which is wholesome, free
from akusala. Then there can be conditions for more calm. Calm in
samatha can reach such a high degree that one becomes totally absorbed
in the meditation subject. There are different stages of this calm
absorption or ``jhāna''. During jhāna one does not receive impressions
through the five senses and thus one is at those moments not enslaved
to them. One enjoys a higher happiness. In higher stages of jhāna one
attains a greater tranquillity of mind until one no longer feels
rapture or joy; one transcends happy feeling and there is equanimity
instead. When, however, the citta is not jhānacitta, there are
sense-impressions again.

Samatha is a means for the cultivation of wholesomeness. People who
apply themselves to samatha may become very peaceful and amiable. They
can be of great comfort to people who are restless. However, in samatha
defilements are not eradicated. Although one is not enslaved to
sense-impressions during the time of jhāna, one still clings to them
when the citta is no longer jhānacitta. The jhānas do not last; they
are impermanent. Moreover, there is a more subtle form of clinging, a
clinging to the happiness of the jhānas. One might think that one is
without clinging when one does not indulge in sense-pleasures. However,
one might still cling to the joy of jhāna which is not associated with
sense-pleasures, one might cling to pleasant feeling or equanimity
which can accompany jhānacitta. 

For the development of samatha paññā is necessary, but this kind of
paññā cannot eradicate defilements. There is a higher paññā which can
eradicate all defilements, even the most subtle forms of clinging. This
paññā is developed in ``insight meditation'' or ``vipassanā''. In
vipassanā, paññā gradually eliminates ignorance, the root of all
defilements. One learns more about the realities which present
themselves through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body­sense and mind at any
moment. We know so little about the most common things of daily life.
How often are we aware of bodily movements during the day? How often
are we aware of bodily phenomena such as hardness or softness while we
are stretching or bending our arms, or when we are moving our lips
while talking? We do not really know what sound is, what hearing is or
what it is we take for ``self'' while hearing. We do not know the
phenomena which appear at the present moment.

When we are absorbed in the outer appearance and the details of things,
we will not be able to be aware of the realities of the present moment.
So long as we are carried away by like or dislike of what we see and
hear, it is impossible to see things as they are. It is as if we are
asleep; we are not yet awake to the truth. The Buddha was perfectly
mindful and he had complete knowledge of all the different kinds of
mental and physical phenomena. Therefore he could call himself ``the
Awakened One''; he was fully awake to the truth. We, too, should wake up
to the truth.

In vipassanā, paññā will gradually develop and it will know things as
they are. In being aware of the reality which appears at the present
moment we learn that there are two kinds of reality: physical phenomena
or rūpa and mental phenomena or nāma. Rūpa does not know anything
whereas nāma experiences something; it experiences an object. For
example, visible object is rūpa; it does not know anything. Seeing is a
type of nāma; it experiences an object: visible object. Hearing and
thinking are other types of nāma, different from seeing. There are many
different types of nāma and rūpa, and in vipassanā we learn to
experience their characteristics. 

In the development of vipassanā the impermanence of nāmas and rūpas will
be directly known. One may have reflected before on the impermanence of
all things in life. Reflection on the truth is necessary, but it is not
the same as the direct knowledge of the impermanence of all realities
in and around oneself. In the beginning the arising and falling away of
nāma and rūpa cannot be realised. However, if we learn to be aware of
different characteristics of nāma and rūpa which appear one at a time,
and if we realize that each nāma or rūpa which appears now is different
from preceding nāmas and rūpas, we will be less inclined to think that
nāma and rūpa last, and we will be less inclined to take them for
``self''. 

In the Greater Discourse of a Full Moon (Middle Length Sayings III, no.
109) we read that the Buddha, while he was staying near Sāvatthī in the
palace of Migāra's mother in the Eastern Monastery, said to the monks:

@quotation
``@dots{}What do you think about this, monks? Is material shape permanent or
impermanent?''

``Impermanent, revered sir.''

``But is what is impermanent painful or is it pleasant?''

``Painful, revered sir.''

``And is it right to regard that which is impermanent, suffering, liable
to change, as 'This is mine, this am I, this is myself'?''

``No, revered sir.''

The Buddha asked the same about mental phenomena. 

@end quotation
In the Discourse on Mindfulness of the Body (Middle Length Sayings, III,
no. 119) we read that the Buddha, when he was staying near Sāvatthī, at
the Jeta Grove, spoke to the monks about mindfulness of the body and
the advantages of it. Some of these are the following:

@dots{}He is one who overcomes dislike and liking, and dislike (and liking)
do not overcome him; he fares along constantly conquering any dislike
(and liking) that have arisen. He is one who overcomes fear and dread,
and fear and dread do not overcome him; and he fares along constantly
conquering any fear and dread that have arisen. He is one who bears
cold, heat, hunger, thirst, the touch of gadfly, mosquito, wind and
sun, creeping things, ways of speech that are irksome, unwelcome; he is
of a character to bear bodily feelings which, arising, are painful,
acute, sharp, shooting, disagreeable, miserable, deadly@enddots{}

We will gradually learn to give in less to attachment and to anger or
aversion when we have realized that these are only different types of
nāma which arise because of conditions and then fall away again
immediately.

We should not wait to develop insight, right understanding of realities,
until we are old or have retired from our work. When we develop this
wisdom we will know ourselves better, we will be aware more often of
the moments of akusala cittas which arise, even while we are doing good
deeds. Conceit about our good deeds may arise or we may expect
something in return for our good deeds, such as praise or a good name.
When we gradually see more clearly that there are only nāma and rūpa
which arise because of conditions, there will eventually be less
clinging to a concept of self who performs kusala or akusala. When
there is less clinging to the self good deeds will become purer. The
paññā developed in vipassanā is the ``Right Understanding'' of the
eightfold Path which leads to nibbāna. Everyone has to tread this Path
by himself. One can only purify oneself. One cannot be purified by
other people; other people can only help one to find the right Path.
There will be no lasting world peace so long as there is craving,
ill-will and ignorance. It is very necessary to take part of the world
organisations which promote the peace and the welfare of nations, and
to give material aid to those who are in need. However, we should
realize that this is not enough, that it will only help to a certain
degree. The real causes of war are craving, ill-will and ignorance.
Only in developing paññā can we eliminate craving, ill-will and
ignorance. 

The eightfold Path leads to nibbāna. Nibbāna is the end of all
defilements. It can be realized here and now, in this life. When paññā 
has been developed stage by stage it can reach the degree that
enlightenment can be attained. At that moment nibbāna is
experienced@footnote{paññā which experiences the nāmas and rūpas of
our life is ``mundane'' or ``lokiya paññā ''; paññā which experiences
nibbāna is ``supramundane'' or ``lokuttara paññā ''.}. When one has
realized nibbāna one understands what it means to be ``awakened to the
truth''. 

@node The Teaching of Dhamma
@chapter The Teaching of Dhamma

The Buddha proved his compassion for men in his teaching of Dhamma. One
may wonder why it is especially the teaching of Dhamma that proves the
Buddha's compassion. Are there no other ways of helping people, such as
visiting the sick and speaking kind words to other people in order to
make them happy? It is true that one can help one's fellow men in doing
good deeds and in speaking kind words. However, it is not possible to
give them true happiness in this way. When one is kind to other people
one might help them in so far as one can make them feel more relaxed or
less depressed for a moment. However, there are people who tend to go
on being anxious and depressed, no matter how kindly one treats them.

The Buddha knew that the deepest cause of happiness and sorrow is within
man. It is not possible to give other people real happiness; one can
only be a condition for them to feel happy for a while. The Buddha
helped people in the most effective way: he helped them to have right
understanding about their life, about themselves, and about the way to
find true happiness.

His disciples followed his example and helped people by teaching them
Dhamma. We read in the Discourse on an Exhortation to Channa (Middle
Length Sayings III, no. 144) that Sāriputta and Mahā Cunda, while they
were staying on Mount Vulture Peak, visited a sick monk whose name was
Channa. First Sāriputta asked Channa how he was feeling, and then he
offered to give him the right kind of food and medicines, and to attend
personally to his needs if he wanted this. However, he knew that kind
words and deeds were not enough. When it was the right moment Sāriputta
and Mahā Cunda spoke to Channa about the Dhamma, in order to help him
to have right understanding about his life. 

In the Discourse on the Analysis of the Undefiled (Middle Length Sayings
III, no. 139) we read that the Buddha, when he was staying near
Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, spoke about the eightfold Path which is the
``Middle Way''. One should not be intent on the happiness of
sense-pleasures and on the other hand not be intent on the practice of
self-mortification. The Buddha told his disciples that they should not
say of other people that they are walking the right path or the wrong
path; he said that there should be neither approval nor disapproval of
persons, but that they should teach them what is the right course and
what is the wrong course. They should teach them which cause brings
which effect. They should simply teach Dhamma. Dhamma means everything
that is real. The Buddha helped people to develop right understanding
about everything one can experience, no matter whether it is good or
bad. 

If one wants to eliminate defilements one should first understand what
are akusala cittas and what are kusala cittas and be aware of them when
they arise. Only when we can be aware of cittas when they appear will
we know them as they are. We will not know cittas by speculation. As we
have seen, cittas do not last. Citta arises and then falls away
immediately to be followed by the next citta. There is only one citta
at a time. Life consists of an unbroken series of cittas, arising and
falling away continuously. There is no moment without citta. There are
many kinds of cittas which perform different functions such as seeing,
hearing and thinking. Moreover, there are akusala cittas, unwholesome
cittas, and kusala cittas, wholesome cittas. An akusala citta and a
kusala citta cannot arise at the same moment since there can be only
one citta at a time. However, akusala cittas may arise shortly after
kusala cittas have fallen away, even during the time one is doing a
good deed. When the kusala cittas have fallen away, regret about one's
good deed may arise. This is akusala.

In the Discourse on an Exhortation to Channa, mentioned above, we read
that Channa suffered severe pains. As he could not stand the pains any
longer he committed suicide. The Buddha knew that before the moment of
his death Channa had kusala cittas after the akusala cittas which
motivated him to perform this unwholesome deed. He was able to purify
himself of defilements after his deed. The Buddha said therefore: ``He
took the knife to himself without incurring blame''. We do not know
about the citta of someone else from the outward appearance of his
deeds, because we do not know each different moment of citta. We can
only find out with regard to ourselves at which moment there is akusala
citta or kusala citta, and even that is most difficult. 

Akusala cittas can be rooted in three different unwholesome ``roots'',
``akusala hetus''. They are:
@itemize

@item
attachment (in Pāli: lobha)

@item
aversion or ill-will (in Pāli: dosa)

@item
ignorance (in Pāli: moha)

@end itemize
By the word ``root'' is meant the foundation of the citta. The root is the
foundation of the citta just as the root of a tree supports the tree
and makes it grow. There are many different degrees of these three
akusala hetus.

All akusala cittas are caused by moha, ignorance. Ignorance is, for
example, not knowing what is unwholesome and what is wholesome, and not
knowing which cause brings which result in life. There are many degrees
of moha. An animal has a great deal of moha; it does not know about
kusala and akusala, it does not know how to cultivate wholesomeness.
However, not only animals have moha, human beings can have a great deal
of moha as well. Akusala cittas arise more often than kusala cittas and
thus there are countless moments of moha, no matter whether we are
walking, standing, sitting or lying down. Moha can only be completely
eradicated when paññā has been developed to the degree that one can
reach perfection, that is, when one has become an arahat at the
attainment of the fourth and last stage of enlightenment@footnote{
There are four stages of enlightenment and at each stage defilements
are progressively eradicated. }.

When the citta which arises is accompanied by lobha, attachment, and by
moha, the citta is called ``lobha-mūla-citta'', or citta rooted in
attachment@footnote{Mūla means root; it is the same as hetu.}. At
that moment there is not only moha, which is common to all akusala
cittas but there is lobha as well. Lobha-mūla-citta which has moha and
lobha as roots is different from the citta which is rooted only in
moha, ignorance of realities. Lobha can be greed, lust, selfish desire,
and it can be a very subtle form of attachment as well, a form of
attachment one can hardly recognize if one does not yet have the right
understanding.

Lobha can be accompanied by pleasant feeling. For instance, when we
enjoy beautiful music there is lobha-mūla-citta. Then the citta is
akusala, although this kind of lobha is not as gross as greed or lust.
One might be inclined to think that whenever there is pleasant feeling,
the citta which is accompanied by this feeling must be kusala citta.
However, when there is pleasant feeling the citta is not necessarily
kusala citta; pleasant feeling can also accompany akusala citta. For
instance, when we do a good deed there can be kusala citta with
pleasant feeling, but when we feel happy because of beautiful music or
a beautiful view, the citta is akusala; it is lobha-mūla-citta with
pleasant feeling. We can be deluded about the truth very easily. We
find feeling so important that we cannot see anything else. We are
unable to know whether the citta is akusala or kusala because we pay
attention only to the feeling at that moment.

Lobha-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in attachment, can be accompanied
either by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling. When we want to
do something such as standing up, walking, taking hold of an object,
the lobha-mūla-cittas which arise may be accompanied by indifferent
feeling. We do not, usually, have pleasant feeling when we stand up or
when we reach for a glass of water. We cannot help having lobha very
often. All people, except arahats are bound to have lobha.

The Buddha did not speak to those who still have defilements in terms of
``sin'' or ``punishment''. The Buddha pointed out everything which is real
and he explained which cause would bring which effect. The bad deeds
one does will bring about their own results, just as a seed produces a
tree. This is the law of cause and result, of ``kamma'' and ``vipāka''. The
Buddha explained to his disciples that there should be neither approval
nor disapproval of persons, but that they should simply teach Dhamma.
In that way people will know what is real. Lobha is real and one should
therefore know what lobha is, what its characteristic is, and when it
arises.

Another unwholesome root is dosa, aversion. When the citta which arises
is accompanied by dosa and moha, the citta is called ``dosa-mūla-citta'',
citta rooted in aversion. At that moment there is not only moha, which
is common to all akusala cittas, but there is dosa as well. Dosa
appears in its coarsest form as anger or ill-will. There is dosa when
one hurts or kills a living being, when one speaks harsh words, or when
one curses. Dosa is always accompanied by unpleasant feeling.

There are more subtle forms of dosa as well: dosa can be a slight
aversion when we see or hear something unpleasant, or when we are in a
bad mood. Dosa can be recognized by the feeling which accompanies it.
Even when there is a very vague feeling of uneasiness we can be sure
there is dosa. Dosa arises quite often in a day. We are bound to have
dosa when there is a loud noise or an ugly sight.

There are three ``wholesome roots'' or ``sobhana hetus'', which are the
opposite of the akusala hetus. They are:

@itemize
@item
non-attachment (alobha)

@item
non-aversion or kindness (adosa)

@item
wisdom (amoha or paññā )
@end itemize

Kusala cittas are not accompanied by lobha, dosa or moha. They are
always accompanied by alobha, non-attachment, and adosa, non-aversion,
but not always by paññā . Thus, citta can be kusala without wisdom
(paññā ). One can, for example, help other people without understanding
that helping is kusala and that wholesome deeds bring pleasant results.
However, when there is paññā the citta has a higher degree of
wholesomeness. If one observes the precepts@footnote{Laypeople can
observe five precepts, which are rules of training to abstain from
killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying and the taking of
intoxicants, including alcoholic drinks.} only because one considers
them as rules, prescribed in the teachings, without any understanding
of the reasons for those precepts, ill deeds can be suppressed, but not
at all times. If the temptations are too strong one will transgress the
precepts. If one has understanding of unwholesome deeds and wholesome
deeds, and knows the effect of those deeds, this understanding is a
condition for observing the precepts more often. We can develop more
wholesomeness in understanding realities, in understanding their causes
and effects. 

Everyone, except the arahat, has both akusala cittas and kusala cittas.
Each citta arises because of the appropriate conditions. Cittas cannot
arise without conditions. It depends on various conditions whether
there will be akusala citta or kusala citta. We all have accumulated
conditions for both unwholesomeness and wholesomeness. If the present
citta is akusala one accumulates a condition for more unwholesomeness
and if the present citta is kusala one accumulates a condition for more
wholesomeness. For example, when we have a slight feeling of aversion,
there is dosa-mūla-citta. If dosa-mūla-cittas occur quite often, we
accumulate dosa and dosa becomes a habit. If one is easily inclined to
strong dosa it can motivate unwholesome deeds and unwholesome speech.

One may wonder how one can accumulate unwholesomeness and wholesomeness,
as each citta which arises falls away completely. Each citta which
arises falls away completely but it conditions the succeeding citta.
Cittas arise and fall away in succession. That is the reason why past
accumulations can go on from one moment to the next moment. If we
understand how different people's accumulations are we will be less
inclined to blame other people when they do wrong. We will try to help
them to have right understanding of the accumulation of kusala and
akusala. If we have more right understanding of the conditions which
make us act the way we do we will be able to lead a more wholesome
life.

One may wonder what the Buddha taught about the will or intention which
motivates ill deeds and good deeds. Is there no ``free will'' which can
direct one's actions, speech and thinking? When we think of a ``free
will'', we generally think of a ``self'' who has control over one's
decisions to do good or to do wrong. However, cittas arise because of
their own conditions; there is no ``self'' who can let cittas arise at
will.

The Pāli term ``kamma'' literally means action. In reality kamma is
intention or volition. It is not that which is generally understood by
``free will''. Kamma does not last, it arises and falls away with the
citta. Thus, one should not take it for ``self'' or as belonging to a
``self''. Kusala kamma or akusala kamma is volition which motivates good
or bad deeds. For example, there is akusala kamma through the body when
one hits someone; there is akusala kamma through speech when one speaks
harsh words or when one curses someone; there is akusala kamma through
the mind when one has the intention to take away something which
belongs to someone else, or when one plans to kill someone.

The Buddha taught that everyone will experience the result of the kamma
he has performed; one will reap what one has sown. Kamma is the cause
which produces its result. The mental result of kamma is a type of
citta which is called ``vipākacitta''. Akusala kamma will bring an
unpleasant result or akusala vipākacitta; kusala kamma will bring a
pleasant result or kusala vipākacitta.

People are born with different mental capacities, with different bodily
features and in different circumstances. In the Discourse on the Lesser
Analysis of Deeds (Middle Length Sayings III, no. 135) we read that,
when the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, the
brahman Subha asked him what the cause was of the differences among
human beings:

@quotation

``Now, good Gotama, what is the cause, what is the reason that lowness
and excellence are to be seen among human beings while they are in
human form? For, good Gotama, human beings of short lifespan are to be
seen and those of long lifespan; those of many and those of few
illnesses; those who are ugly, those who are beautiful; those who are
of little account, those of great account; those who are poor, those
who are wealthy; those who are of lowly families, those of high
families; those who are weak in wisdom, those who are full of wisdom.'' 

@end quotation

The Buddha answered Subha:
@quotation

``Deeds (kamma) are one's own, brahman youth, beings are heirs to deeds,
deeds are matrix, deeds are kin, deeds are arbiters. Deed divides
beings, that is to say by lowness and excellence.'' 

@end quotation

Not only birth in a certain plane of existence and in certain
surroundings is the result of kamma. Throughout our life we receive
unpleasant and pleasant results. Everyone would like to experience only
pleasant things through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense.
However, everyone is bound to experience both unpleasant and pleasant
things through the five senses because everyone has performed both
akusala kamma and kusala kamma.

A deed we have performed may produce a result shortly afterwards, or it
may produce a result a long time afterwards. We should remember that
volition or kamma which motivates a deed is a mental phenomenon and
that it can therefore be accumulated. Thus, it can bring about its
result later on. The Buddha taught that the akusala kamma and the
kusala kamma we have accumulated throughout our life and during
countless existences before this life, will produce their results when
there are the right conditions for the results to be produced.
Vipākacitta is the result of kamma. When we see unpleasant things,
there is at that moment akusala vipāka, which is the result of akusala
kamma. This akusala vipākacitta receives an unpleasant object through
the eyes. When we see pleasant things, the kusala vipākacitta, which is
the result of kusala kamma, receives a pleasant object through the
eyes. When we hear unpleasant things the akusala vipākacitta, which is
the result of akusala kamma, receives an unpleasant object through the
ears. When we hear pleasant things the kusala vipākacitta, which is the
result of kusala kamma, receives a pleasant object through the ears.
There is vipāka every time we see, hear, smell, taste or receive an
impression through body-contact. We cannot prevent the arising of
vipākacitta; we cannot help seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and
receiving impressions through body-contact. Each citta, and thus also
each vipākacitta, has its own conditions; nobody can make cittas arise
at will. Which particular vipākacitta arises at the present moment is
beyond control. When one does good deeds one can be sure that those
deeds will bring a pleasant result, but the moment when the result will
take place depends on other conditions as well.

The akusala vipākacitta which experiences an unpleasant object through
the eyes, is not the same as the akusala vipākacitta which experiences
an unpleasant object through the ears. There is not a ``self'' who
experiences different unpleasant and pleasant objects through the five
senses. Each citta has its own conditions and it is different from all
other cittas. The more one realizes this truth, the less will one be
inclined to believe in a ``self''. 

Vipākacittas arise and fall away within split-seconds, like all other
types of citta. After the vipākacittas have fallen away another type of
citta arises; for example, a citta which likes or dislikes the object,
that is, lobha-mūla-citta or dosa-mūla-citta. If people do not know the
different types of cittas, they may be inclined to think that like or
dislike is still vipāka. However, like and dislike arise after the
vipākacittas have fallen away; they are not the result of kamma.
Lobha-mūla-citta or dosa-mūla-citta is not vipākacitta but akusala
citta.

Different types of citta succeed one another very rapidly. For example,
when we hear a harsh sound, the vipākacitta arises at the moment the
sound is perceived through the ears and then falls away immediately.
The moments of vipāka are extremely short. After that there may be
akusala cittas. For instance, dislike of the sound may arise, and this
follows so closely that it seems to occur at the same moment as the
hearing. In reality these cittas do not arise at the same moment. Each
citta has its own conditions and each citta performs its own function.
Vipākacitta is the result of former akusala kamma or kusala kamma. The
like or dislike after the vipāka is unwholesome. We should realize that
through the arising of akusala citta more akusala is accumulated and
that this leads to still more unwholesomeness in our lives.

Many times we may not know at which moment there is vipāka and at which
moment there is akusala citta, because we find our feelings about the
object we experience so important. The pleasant feeling which
accompanies lobha-mūla-citta and the unpleasant feeling which
accompanies dosa-mūla-citta can be so strong that we are carried away
by these feelings. Thus we cannot see things as they are.

Part of our life is spent in receiving pleasant or unpleasant results
and part of our life is spent with akusala cittas or kusala cittas
which can motivate unwholesome or wholesome deeds. These deeds
condition life in the future, they condition the results which will be
received in the future. If we have more understanding of vipāka, which
is the result of our own deeds, it will help us to be more patient when
there are unpleasant results in our life. We will not blame other
people for unpleasant vipāka we receive, because kamma is the real
cause of vipāka. We will give in less to our feelings concerning vipāka
when we know the different cittas which arise at different moments.

Indeed, the Buddha showed his great compassion in teaching people to
understand reality, in teaching them Dhamma.

@node Wholesome Deeds
@chapter Wholesome Deeds

The Buddha helped people to have right understanding of unwholesomeness
and wholesomeness; he helped them by teaching them Dhamma. Dhamma
excels all other gifts, because the most beneficial gift one can give
others is helping them to develop right understanding so that they can
lead a more wholesome life. In this way they will find more happiness.

In the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Twos, Ch IV, par 2) we read that it is
not easy to repay one's parents for all they have done:

Monks, it is not an easy task to repay two persons, I declare@footnote{
The English translation has: one can never repay@dots{}Here I followed the
Thai translation.}. What two? Mother and father. Even if one should
carry about his mother on one shoulder and his father on the other, and
so doing should live a hundred years, attain a hundred years; and if he
should support them, anointing them with unguents@dots{}if he should
establish his parents in supreme authority, in the absolute rule over
this mighty earth abounding in the seven treasures @minus{}not even thus could
he repay his parents. What is the cause of that? Monks, parents do much
for their children: they bring them up, they nourish them, they
introduce them to this world.

Moreover, monks, whoso incites his unbelieving parents, settles and
establishes them in faith; whoso incites his immoral parents, settles
and establishes them in morality; whoso incites his stingy parents,
settles and establishes them in liberality; whoso incites his foolish
parents@footnote{who have little understanding} , settles and
establishes them in wisdom, such a one, just by so doing, does repay,
does more than repay what is due to his parents.

In this sutta the Buddha points out how important it is to help other
people to have right understanding about the development of
wholesomeness; he explained that this is the way to repay one's
parents. Establishing one's parents in faith is mentioned first. The
word ``faith'' however, is not used in the sense of ``faith in a person''.
The Buddha did not want people to perform wholesome deeds in obedience
to him or in obedience to certain rules. Faith means confidence in
wholesomeness, confidence that the cultivation of wholesomeness is
beneficial. Therefore, any time there is wholesomeness there must be
faith. After faith the above-quoted sutta speaks about ``morality'', and
then generosity is mentioned. Wisdom or right understanding is
mentioned last.

When the different ways of kusala kamma are explained in the suttas,
dāna or generosity is usually mentioned first, sīla or morality is
mentioned next, and after that ``bhāvanā'' or mental development. There
are many ways to develop kusala and understanding of these ways
conditions the performing of them. Paññā, understanding, is the factor
which above all conditions the elimination of akusala and the
development of kusala. There can be dāna and sīla without paññā , but
when there is paññā , dāna and sīla are of a higher degree of kusala.
There can be no bhāvanā or mental development without paññā . Paññā is
an indispensable factor for bhāvanā, and on the other hand paññā is
developed through bhāvanā. 

Paññā, understanding things as they are, will help people to lead a more
wholesome life. There are many levels of paññā . To the extent that
paññā is developed defilements will be eliminated and thus people will
find peace of mind. It is beneficial to develop right understanding of
akusala as akusala and of kusala as kusala and to help others to
develop this understanding as well. 

All akusala cittas are caused by ignorance or moha. There are different
types of akusala citta. Some akusala cittas are rooted in moha alone.
There are also akusala cittas rooted in moha and lobha. Lobha is
attachment, selfishness or greed. Furthermore there are akusala cittas
rooted in moha and dosa. Dosa is aversion, ill-will or anger.
Unwholesome deeds are motivated by akusala cittas. 

When there is kusala citta there are no lobha, dosa or moha with the
citta. Wholesome deeds are motivated by kusala cittas. When we perform
dāna, sīla or bhāvanā, there are no lobha, dosa or moha with the kusala
cittas which motivate these wholesome deeds. It is helpful to know more
about dāna, sīla and bhāvanā in order to lead a more wholesome life. 

One way of developing wholesomeness is dāna. Dāna is giving useful
things to other people, for example, giving away food, clothing or
money to those who are in need. True generosity is a way of eliminating
defilements: at such moments we think of other people, we have no
selfish thoughts. When there is generosity there are no lobha, dosa or
moha.

Giving with the right understanding that generosity is kusala is more
wholesome than giving without this understanding. People who give with
the understanding that this wholesome act is a means to have less
selfishness, are stimulated to develop more wholesomeness. One may
think it a selfish attitude to consider one's own accumulation of
kusala. However, it is not a selfish attitude. When we have the right
understanding of the ways to develop kusala, it is the condition for
kusala cittas to arise more often and this is to the benefit of
everyone. It is to our fellow-man's advantage too when lobha, dosa and
moha are eliminated. It is more agreeable to live with someone who is
not selfish and who is not angry than with a selfish or an angry
person.

There are many degrees of paññā . When paññā is more highly developed,
one understands that it is not ``self'' who performs wholesome deeds, but
cittas which are conditioned by the accumulation of kusala in the past.
Thus there is no reason for conceit or pride. By the development of
paññā , which is a mental phenomenon and which is not ``self'', more
wholesomeness can be accumulated. 

Young children in Thailand are trained to give food to the monks and
thus they accumulate kusala. The Thais call the performing of good
deeds ``tham bun''. When children learn to do good deeds at an early age
it is a condition for them to continue to be generous when they are
grown-up.

When someone gives food to the monks, it is the giver in the first place
who will benefit from this wholesome act; the monks give him the
opportunity to develop wholesomeness. The monks do not thank people for
their gifts; they say words of blessing which show that they rejoice in
the good deeds of the giver. One might find it strange at first that
the monks do not thank people, but when there is more understanding of
the way wholesomeness is developed, one sees these customs in another
light.

Even when we are not giving something away ourselves, there is still
opportunity to develop wholesomeness in appreciating the good deeds of
other people: at that moment there are no lobha, dosa or moha. The
appreciation of other people's good deeds is a way of kusala kamma
included in dāna as well. It is to everyone's advantage when people
appreciate one another's good deeds. It contributes to harmonious
living in society.

The third way of kusala kamma included in dāna concerns giving others,
no matter whether they are in this world or in other planes of
existence, the opportunity to appreciate our good deeds so that they
can have kusala cittas as well. In performing kusala we can help others
to perform kusala as well. It is very inspiring to see other people
looking after their old parents, or to see people studying and teaching
Dhamma. We should follow the example of the Buddha. We should
continually think of means to help others to develop wholesomeness.
This way of kusala kamma is a means to eliminate our defilements. There
are opportunities to develop kusala at any moment. When we have
developed more wisdom we will try not to waste the opportunity for
kusala which presents itself, because human life is very short.

There are three ways of kusala kamma included in sīla or morality. The
first way is observing the precepts. Laypeople usually observe five
precepts. These precepts are:

@itemize

@item
abstaining from killing living beings

@item
abstaining from stealing

@item
abstaining from sexual misbehaviour

@item
abstaining from lying

@item
abstaining from the taking of intoxicants 
including alcoholic drinks

@end itemize

One can observe these precepts just because one follows the rules
without thinking about the reason why one should observe them.
Observing them is kusala kamma, but the degree of wholesomeness is not
very high if there is no right understanding. One observes the precepts
with paññā when one understands that one purifies oneself of akusala
while one observes them.

The killing of a living being is akusala kamma. One may wonder whether
it is not sometimes necessary to kill. Should one not kill when there
is a war, should one not kill insects to protect the crops, should one
not kill mosquitos to protect one's health? The Buddha knew that so
long as people were living in this world they would have many reasons
for transgressing the precepts. He knew that it is very difficult to
observe all the precepts and that one cannot learn in one day to
observe them all. Through right understanding, however, one can
gradually learn to observe them. The precepts are not worded in terms
of, for example, ``You shall not kill''. They are not worded as
commandments, but they are worded as follows: ``I undertake the rule of
training to refrain from destroying life.''

The Buddha pointed out what is unwholesome and what is wholesome, so
that people would find the way to true peace. It is paññā or right
understanding which will lead people to train themselves in the
precepts. Without paññā they will transgress them very easily when the
temptations are too strong, or when the situation is such as to make it
very difficult for people to observe them. When paññā is more developed
it conditions the observing of the precepts more often. One will find
out from experience that the precepts are transgressed because of
lobha, dosa and moha. When it has been understood that observing the
precepts is a way of eliminating defilements, one will even refrain
from intentionally killing mosquitos and ants. We always accumulate
dosa when there is the intention to kill, even if it is a very small
insect. We should find out for ourselves that we accumulate akusala
when killing living beings, no matter whether they are human beings or
animals. However, we cannot force others to refrain from killing living
beings.

To refrain from killing is a kind of dāna as well@minus{}it is the gift of
life, one of the greatest gifts we can give. The classification of
kusala kamma as to whether it be dāna or sīla is not very rigid. The
way realities are classified depends on their different aspects.

As regards the taking of intoxicants, people should find out for
themselves how much unwholesomeness is accumulated in this way. Even if
one has but a slight attachment to them, one accumulates
unwholesomeness, and this may be harmful in the future. When the
attachment is strong enough it will appear in one's speech and deeds.
Even the taking of a little amount of an alcoholic drink can cause one
to have more greed, anger and ignorance. It may have the effect that
people do not realize what they are doing and that they cannot be aware
of the realities of the present moment. Paññā will induce one to drink
less and less and eventually to stop drinking. One does not have to
force oneself not to drink, one just loses the taste for alcohol
because one sees the disadvantages of it. In this way it becomes one's
nature not to drink. The person who has developed paññā to such degree
that he attains the first stage of enlightenment, the ``streamwinner'' or
``sotāpanna'', will never transgress the five precepts again; it has
become his nature to observe them.

The second way of kusala kamma included in sīla is paying respect to
those who deserve respect. It is not necessary to show respect
according to a particular culture; the esteem we feel for someone else
is more important. This induces us to have a humble attitude towards
the person who deserves respect. The way in which people show respect
depends on the customs of the country where they are living or on the
habits they have accumulated. In Thailand people show respect to monks,
teachers and elderly people in a way different from the way people in
western countries show their respect. In some countries the respect
people feel towards others may appear only in a very polite way of
addressing them.

Politeness which comes from one's heart is kusala kamma; at that moment
there are no lobha, dosa and moha. It is kusala kamma to show respect
to monks, to teachers and to elderly people. In Thailand people show
respect to their ancestors; they express their gratefulness for the
good qualities of their ancestors. This is kusala kamma. It is not
important whether ancestors are able to see the people paying respect
to them or not. We cannot know in which plane they have been reborn @minus{}in
this human plane, or in some other plane of existence where they might
be able to see people paying respect to them. It is wholesome to think
of one's ancestors with gratefulness. 

We should always try to find out whether there are akusala cittas or
kusala cittas which motivate a deed, in order to understand the meaning
of that deed. Thus we will understand and appreciate many customs of
the Thais and we will not so easily misjudge them or find them
superstitious. In the same way we should understand the paying of
respect to the Buddha image. It is not idol worship; indeed, it is
kusala kamma if one thinks of the Buddha's excellent qualities: of his
wisdom, of his purity and of his compassion. One does not pray to a
Buddha in heaven, because the Buddha does not stay in heaven or in any
plane of existence; he passed away completely. It is wholesome to be
grateful to the Buddha and to try to follow the Path he discovered. In
which way one shows respect to the Buddha depends on the inclinations
one has accumulated.

The third way of kusala kamma included in sīla is helping other people
by words or deeds. The act of helping other people will have a higher
degree of wholesomeness if there is the right understanding that
helping is kusala kamma, and that this is a way to eliminate
selfishness and other defilements. Thus one will be urged to perform
more kusala kamma; one will be more firmly established in sīla. It is
therefore more wholesome to perform sīla with right understanding or
paññā .

Performing one's duties is not always kusala kamma: people may perform
their duties just because they are paid for their work. For example, a
teacher teaches his pupils and a doctor takes care of his patients
because it is their profession to do so. However, they can develop
wholesomeness if they perform their duties with kindness and
compassion.

Paññā conditions one to perform kusala kamma, no matter what one's
duties are. Wholesomeness can be developed at any time we are with
other people, when we talk to them or listen to them.

Helping other people with kind words and deeds alone is not enough. When
it is the right moment we can help others in a deeper and more
effective way, that is, helping them to understand who they are, why
they are in this world and what the aim of their life in this world is.
This way of helping is included in bhāvanā or mental development.

@node Mental Development
@chapter Mental Development

The Buddha said that one should realize the impermanence of all things.
Everybody is subject to old age, sickness and death. All things are
susceptible to change. What one is enjoying today may be changed
tomorrow. Many people do not want to face this truth; they are too
attached to the pleasant things they can enjoy through eyes, ears,
nose, tongue and bodysense. They do not realize that these things are
not true happiness.

The Buddha cured people's ignorance by helping them to have right
understanding about their life; he taught them Dhamma. The Buddha
taught different ways of developing wholesomeness: dāna or generosity,
sīla or morality and bhāvanā or mental development. Bhāvanā is a way of
kusala kamma which is on a higher level, because wisdom is developed
through bhāvanā.

One may wonder why wisdom, paññā , is essential. The answer is that only
understanding things as they are can eliminate ignorance. Out of
ignorance people take what is unwholesome for wholesome. Ignorance
causes sorrow. The Buddha always helped people to have right
understanding of their different cittas. He explained what akusala
cittas and kusala cittas are, in order that people could develop more
wholesomeness.

We can verify in our life that the Buddha taught the truth. His
teachings are true not only for Buddhists, but for everybody, no matter
what race or nationality he is or what religion he professes.
Attachment or greed (in Pāli: lobha), aversion or anger (in Pāli: dosa)
and ignorance (in Pāli: moha) are common to everybody, not only to
Buddhists. Should not everyone eradicate lobha, dosa and moha?

People do not always realize that lobha, dosa and moha lead to sorrow.
They may recognize unwholesomeness when it is coarse, but not when it
is more subtle. For example, they may know that the citta is
unwholesome when there is lobha which is as coarse as greed or lust,
but they do not recognize lobha when it is more subtle, such as
attachment to beautiful things or to dear people. Why is it unwholesome
to have attachment to our relatives and friends? It is true that we are
bound to have lobha, but we should realize that attachment is not the
same as pure loving-kindness (in Pāli: mettā). When we think that we
have pure loving-kindness, there can be moments of attachment too.
Attachment is not wholesome; it will sooner or later bring unhappiness.
Although people may not like to see this truth, one day they will
experience that lobha brings unhappiness. Through death we are bound to
lose people who are dear to us. And when sickness or old age affect our
sense faculties we may no longer be able to enjoy beautiful things
through eyes and ears.

If we do not have the right understanding of the realities of life we
will not know how to bear the loss of dear people. We read in the Udāna
(Verses of Uplift, Ch VIII, Pāṭaligāma, par 8, Khuddaka Nikāya) that,
while the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in East Park, at the
storeyed house of Migāra's mother, Visākhā came to see him. Visākhā who
had lost her grand-daughter came to see the Buddha with wet clothes and
wet hair. The Buddha said:

@quotation

``Why, Visākhā! How is it that you come here with clothes and hair still
wet at an unseasonable hour?''

``O, sir, my dear and lovely grand-daughter is dead! That is why I come
here with hair and clothes still wet at an unseasonable hour.''

``Visākhā, would you like to have as many sons and grandsons as there are
men in Sāvatthī?''

``Yes, sir, I would indeed!''

``But how many men do you suppose die daily in Sāvatthī?''

``Ten, sir, or maybe nine, or eight. Maybe seven, six, five or four,
three, two; may be one a day dies in Sāvatthī, sir. Sāvatthī is never
free from men dying, sir.''

``What think you, Visākhā? In such case would you ever be without wet
hair and clothes?''

``Surely not, sir! Enough for me, sir, of so many sons and grandsons!''

``Visākhā, whoso have a hundred things beloved, they have a hundred
sorrows. Whoso have ninety, eighty@dots{}thirty, twenty things beloved@enddots{}
whoso have ten@dots{}whoso have but one thing beloved, have but one
sorrow. Whoso have no thing beloved, they have no sorrow. Sorrowless
are they and passionless. Serene are they, I declare.''

@end quotation

People who see that it is unwholesome to be enslaved by attachment to
people and to the things around themselves, want to develop more
understanding of realities by applying themselves to bhāvanā, mental
development. Studying the Buddha's teachings and explaining them to
others is kusala kamma included in bhāvanā. In studying the teachings
paññā will be developed. If we want to understand what the Buddha
taught it is essential to read the scriptures as they have come down to
us at the present time in the ``Three Collections'': the ``Vinaya'', the
``Suttanta'' and the ``Abhidhamma''. Study alone, however, is not enough.
We should experience the truth of Dhamma in daily life. Only then will
we know things as they really are. Teaching Dhamma to other people is
kusala kamma of a high degree. In this way one not only helps others to
have more understanding about their life, one develops one's own
understanding as well. Teaching Dhamma is the most effective way of
helping other people to develop kusala and to eradicate akusala. 

Another way of kusala kamma included in bhāvanā is the development of
calm or ``samatha bhāvanā''. In samatha there are specific meditation
subjects which can condition the calm which is temporary freedom from
lobha, dosa and moha. One must have right understanding of the
meditation subject and of the way to become calm. When samatha has been
highly developed different stages of jhāna or absorption can be
attained. However, the attainment of jhāna is extremely difficult and
one must have accumulated the right conditions in order to attain it.
When the citta is jhānacitta there are no lobha, dosa and moha. Jhāna
is kusala kamma of a high degree. Jhāna is not the same as a trance
which might be experienced after taking certain drugs. Those who take
drugs want to obtain the desired end in an easy way and their action is
prompted by lobha. Those who apply themselves to samatha have the
sincere wish to purify themselves of lobha, dosa and moha; they do not
look for sensational or thrilling experiences.

Samatha can purify the mind, but it cannot eradicate unwholesome latent
tendencies. When the citta is not jhānacitta, lobha, dosa and moha are
bound to arise again. The person who applies himself to samatha cannot
eradicate the belief in a self, and so long as there is the concept of
self, defilements cannot be eradicated.

The clinging to the concept of self can only be eradicated through
vipassanā. Vipassanā or ``insight meditation'' is another way of kusala
kamma included in bhāvanā. Through the development of vipassanā
ignorance of realities is eliminated. One learns to see things as they
are in being aware, for example, when one sees, hears, smells, tastes,
when one receives impressions through the bodysense or when one thinks.
When we experience that all things in ourselves and around ourselves
are only mental phenomena or nāma and physical phenomena or rūpa which
arise and fall away, we will be less inclined to take them for self.

What is the reason that we all are inclined to cling to a self? The
reason is that because of our ignorance we do not know things as they
really are. When we hear a sound, we are ignorant of the different
phenomena which occur during the moment we are hearing that sound. We
think that it is a self who is hearing. However, it is not a self who
is hearing; it is a citta which hears the sound. Citta is a mental
phenomenon, it is nāma, that is, the reality which experiences
something. The citta which hears experiences sound. Sound itself does
not experience anything, it is rūpa. Rūpa is the reality which does not
experience anything. Sound and earsense are conditions for hearing.
Earsense is rūpa as well. One may wonder whether it is true that
earsense does not experience anything. Earsense is a kind of rūpa in
the ear which has the capacity to receive sound, but it does not
experience the sound. It is only a condition for the nāma which
experiences the sound. Each citta has its own conditions through which
it arises. Seeing is conditioned by eyesense which is rūpa and by
visible object which is also rūpa. There is no self who performs
different functions such as seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
receiving impressions through the bodysense and thinking. These are
different nāmas, each of which arises because of its own conditions.

We read in the Greater Discourse on the Destruction of Craving (Middle
Length Sayings I, no. 38) that the Buddha, while he was staying near
Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove, spoke to the monk, Sāti who had a
misconception about the Buddha's teachings. Sāti understood from the
Buddha's teachings that consciousness lasts, and that it is one and the
same consciousness which speaks, feels, and experiences the results of
good and bad deeds. Several monks heard about Sāti's wrong view. After
they had tried in vain to dissuade him from his wrong view, they spoke
to the Buddha about him. The Buddha summoned Sāti and said to him:

@quotation

``Is it true, as is said, that a pernicious view like this has accrued to
you, Sāti: 'In so far as I understand Dhamma taught by the Lord, it is
that this consciousness itself runs on, fares on, not another'?''

``Even so do I, Lord, understand Dhamma taught by the Lord: it is this
consciousness itself that runs on, fares on, not another.''

``What is this consciousness, Sāti?''

``It is this, Lord, that speaks, that feels, that experiences now here,
now there, the fruition of deeds that are lovely and that are
depraved.''

``But to whom, foolish man, do you understand that Dhamma was taught by
me thus? Foolish man, has not consciousness generated by conditions
been spoken of in many a figure by me, saying: 'Apart from condition
there is no origination of consciousness'? But now you, foolish man,
not only misrepresent me because of your own wrong grasp, but you also
injure yourself and give rise to much demerit which, foolish man, will
be for your woe and sorrow for a long time.''

@dots{}Then the Lord addressed the monks, saying:

``Do you, monks, understand that Dhamma was taught by me thus so that
this monk Sāti, a fisherman's son, because of his own wrong grasp not
only misrepresents me but is also injuring himself and giving rise to
much demerit?''

``No, Lord. For in many a figure has consciousness generated by
conditions been spoken of to us by the Lord, saying: 'Apart from
condition there is no origination of consciousness.' ``

``It is good, monks, it is good that you understand thus Dhamma taught by
me to you, monks. For in many a figure has consciousness generated by
conditions been spoken of by me to you, monks, saying: 'Apart from
condition there is no origination of consciousness.' 

@dots{}It is because, monks, an appropriate condition arises that
consciousness is known by this or that name: if consciousness arises
because of eye and material shapes, it is known as
seeing-consciousness; if consciousness arises because of ear and sounds
it is known as hearing-consciousness; if consciousness arises because
of nose and smells, it is known as smelling-consciousness; if
consciousness arises because of tongue and tastes it is known as
tasting-consciousness; if consciousness arises because of body and
touches, it is known as tactile-consciousness; if consciousness arises
because of mind and mental objects, it is known as mental
consciousness. Monks, as a fire burns because of this or that
appropriate condition, by that it is known; if a fire burns because of
sticks, it is known as a stick-fire; and if a fire burns because of
chips, it is known as a chip-fire; and if a fire burns because of
grass, it is known as a grass-fire; and if a fire burns because of
cowdung, it is known as a cowdung-fire; and if a fire burns because of
chaff, it is known as a chaff-fire; and if a fire burns because of
rubbish, it is known as a rubbish-fire. Even so, monks, when because of
a condition appropriate to it consciousness arises, it is known by this
or that name@dots{}``
@end quotation


Thinking about different kinds of nāma and rūpa and the conditions for
their arising will help us to have right understanding of them.
However, this is not the same as the direct experience of the truth. We
will understand what nāma and rūpa really are when we know through
direct experience their different characteristics as they appear one at
a time through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind.

Nāma and rūpa arise and fall away so rapidly that we do not realize that
there are different nāma-units and different rūpa-units. For example,
only perceiving sound is a moment which is different from liking or
disliking the sound. We are often inclined to find our like or our
dislike with regard to the object we experience so important that we do
not notice the characteristic of the nāma or rūpa which appears at that
moment. Thus we cannot see things as they are; we take like or dislike
for self. Like and dislike are only nāmas arising because of
conditions; like and dislike are due to one's accumulations. There are
conditions for each citta; there is no self who can let any citta arise
at this or at that moment.

We do not only take mental phenomena for self, we take the body for self
as well. However, the body consists of nothing else but different
rūpa-elements which arise and fall away. There are many different kinds
of rūpa. The rūpas which can be directly experienced through the
bodysense are: hardness or softness, heat, cold, motion and pressure.
These rūpas can be directly experienced through the bodysense, there is
no need to think about them or to name them. The direct understanding
of rūpas whenever they appear is the only way to know that they are
different rūpas and that we should not take them for self.

Different characteristics of nāma and rūpa can be known one at a time as
they appear through the five sense-doors and through the mind-door. So
long as we do not know them as they are we are bound to take them for
self. We are not used to being aware of the phenomena of our life; for
example, we are not used to being aware of seeing. Seeing is a nāma
which experiences only what appears through the eyesense, that is,
visible object. This type of nāma is real and thus it can be
experienced. Before one thinks about what one has seen, there must be
the experience of what appears through the eyes, of visible object. We
are used to paying attention only to the thing or the person we think
about after there has been seeing and thus we are ignorant of the nāma
which only experiences visible object, the nāma which sees. The nāma
which sees is different from the types of nāma which like or dislike
the object or which think about it. If one does not know seeing as it
is, one is bound to take it for self. It is the same with hearing,
which is just the perceiving of sound. When hearing arises we can learn
to be aware of its characteristic; it can be known that it is nāma, a
reality which just perceives sound through the ears. We can gradually
become familiar with the characteristic of hearing and then we will
know that it is different from thinking and from other types of nāma.
We will learn that it is different from rūpa. Thus we will be less
inclined to take it for self.

We can be aware of only one characteristic of nāma or rūpa at a time.
For example, when we hear, there are both hearing and sound, but we
cannot be aware of hearing and sound at the same time, since each citta
experiences only one object at a time. There can be awareness of sound
at one moment and of hearing at another moment, and thus we will
gradually learn that their characteristics are different. 

Only if we learn to be aware of the nāma or rūpa which appears at the
present moment will we see things as they are. Thinking about nāma and
rūpa, reminding ourselves of them or naming realities ``nāma'' and ``rūpa''
is still not the direct experience of reality. If we only think of nāma
and rūpa and do not learn to experience their characteristics, we will
continue to cling to them and we will not become detached from the idea
of self. It is beyond control which characteristic presents itself at a
particular moment. We cannot change the reality which has appeared
already. We should not think that there should be awareness of hearing
first and after that of thinking about what we heard. Different
realities will appear at different moments and there is no particular
sequence we should follow when we are mindful of realities.

In the beginning we are not able to know the arising and falling away of
nāma and rūpa through direct experience. We should just learn to be
aware of whatever characteristic of nāma or rūpa presents itself. When,
for example, smelling appears, we cannot help smelling. At that moment
we can learn to be aware of the characteristic of smelling, without
making any special effort. There is no need to think about it or to
remind ourselves that it is smelling, or that it is nāma.

It is essential to realize that awareness@footnote{Awareness or
mindfulness is in Pāli: sati. It is a mental factor which accompanies
each sobhana citta, ``beautiful citta''. Sati is heedful, non-forgetful
of what is wholesome. There are different levels of sati: there is sati
with dāna, with sīla, with samatha and with vipassanā. Sati in
vipassanā is aware, mindful, non-forgetful of the characteristic of
nāma or rūpa which presents itself through one of the six doors.
Further on in this book I will explain more about sati.} is a type of
nāma as well, which can only arise when there are the right conditions.
There is no self who is aware or who can let awareness arise at will.
Right understanding of the development of vipassanā is a condition for
the arising of awareness. After a moment of awareness there will be a
long time without awareness, or there will be moments when we are only
thinking about nāma and rūpa. In the beginning there cannot be a great
deal of awareness, but even a short moment of right awareness is
beneficial, because paññā developed through the direct experience of
realities is of a higher degree than the paññā developed through
thinking about realities or the paññā developed in samatha. Vipassanā
is kusala kamma of a very high degree, because vipassanā leads to
detachment from the concept of self and eventually to the eradication
of all defilements. If there is less lobha, dosa and moha, it is for
the happiness of the whole world as well.

In the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Nines, Ch II, par 10, Velāma) we read
that the Buddha, while he was dwelling near Sāvatthī, at Jeta Grove, in
Anāthapiṇḍika's Park, spoke to Anāthapiṇḍika
about different degrees of wholesome deeds which bring their fruits
accordingly. Giving gifts to the Buddha and the Order of monks, and
taking one's refuge in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha are deeds
which are of a high degree of kusala, but there are other ways of
kusala which are of still higher degrees.

We read that the Buddha said:

@quotation

@dots{}though with pious heart he took refuge in the Buddha, the Dhamma and
the Sangha, greater would have been the fruit thereof, had he with
pious heart undertaken to keep the precepts: abstention from taking
life, from taking what is not given, from carnal lusts, from lying and
from intoxicating liquor, the cause of sloth.

@dots{}though with pious heart he undertook to keep these precepts, greater
would have been the fruit thereof, had he made become a mere passing
fragrance of loving-kindness.

@dots{}though he made become just the fragrance of loving-kindness, greater
would have been the fruit thereof, had he made become, just for a
finger-snap, the perception of impermanence.

@end quotation

The perception of impermanence is developed when there is a moment of
right awareness of nāma or rūpa. One may be surprised that the
perception of impermanence is more fruitful than other kinds of
wholesome deeds. It is right understanding which realizes the
impermanence of nāma and rūpa and this kind of understanding can change
our life. It can eventually eradicate our clinging, aversion and
ignorance. The time will come when we have to leave this world because
of old age, sickness or accident. Is it not better to take leave of the
world with understanding of what things are than to part from the world
with aversion and fear?

@node The Buddha
@chapter The Buddha

In the Buddhist temples of Thailand we see people paying respect in
front of the Buddha statue by kneeling and touching the floor three
times with their hands and head. Those who have just arrived in
Thailand may wonder whether this way of paying respect is a form of
prayer or whether it has another meaning. Buddhists in Thailand express
in this way their confidence in the ``Three Gems'': the Buddha, the
Dhamma and the Sangha. They take their refuge in the ``Three Gems''.

The first Gem is the Buddha. When people take their refuge in the
Buddha, they say the following words in Pāli: ``Buddha saraṇa
gacchāmi'', which means, ``I go for refuge to the Buddha''. What is the
meaning of the word ``Buddha''? The Illustrator of Ultimate Meaning (the
``Paramatthajotikā'', a commentary to the ``Minor Readings'', Khuddaka
Nikāya) explains, in the commentary to the ``Three Refuges'', the meaning
of the word ``Buddha'':

@quotation
@dots{}and this is said, ``Buddha'': in what sense buddha? He is the
discoverer (bujjhitā) of the Truths, thus he is enlightened (buddha).
He is the enlightener (bodhetā) of the generation, thus he is
enlightened. He is enlightened by omniscience, enlightened by seeing
all, enlightened without being led by others@dots{}he is quite without
defilement, thus he is enlightened; he has travelled by the Path that
goes in only one way, thus he is enlightened; he alone discovered the
peerless complete enlightenment, thus he is enlightened; @dots{}Buddha:
this is not a name made by a mother, made by a father@dots{}this (name)
``Buddha'', which signifies final liberation, is a realistic description
of Enlightened Ones, Blessed Ones, together with their obtainment of
omniscient knowledge at the root of an enlightenment (tree).

@end quotation

The Buddha is the discoverer of the truth. What is the truth the Buddha
discovered all by himself? ``He is enlightened by omniscience,
enlightened by seeing all@enddots{}'' the commentary to the Paramatthajotikā
says. He had developed the wisdom to see and to experience the truth of
all things. Everything in life is impermanent and thus it is
unsatisfactory. People suffer from old age, sickness and death. In
spite of this truth people still cling to the things in and around
themselves. Thus they are not able to see reality. The Buddha
understood through direct experience that all phenomena which arise
fall away immediately. He did not cling to anything at all. 

For us it is difficult to experience the truth of impermanence. Nāma and
rūpa arise and fall away all the time, but one cannot have direct
understanding of impermanence if one's wisdom is not developed. It is
difficult to be aware often of realities when they appear and to
realize what they are: only nāma and rūpa, phenomena which are
impermanent and not self. The more we realize how difficult it is to
see things as they are, the more we understand that the Buddha's wisdom
must have been of the highest degree.

The Buddha taught that everything in life is dukkha. Dukkha literally
means pain, misery or suffering. However, the experience of the truth
of dukkha is much deeper than a feeling of sorrow or contemplation
about suffering. It is the direct understanding of the impermanence of
the nāmas and rūpas in our life and the realization that none of these
phenomena is true happiness. Some people may think that pondering over
this truth is already the experience of the truth of dukkha. However,
one does not have the real understanding of the truth if one merely
thinks about it. When paññā has been developed to the degree that the
arising and falling away of nāma and rūpa are directly understood, one
will come to realize the truth of dukkha. Then one will gradually learn
to be less attached to nāma and rūpa. 

In the Greater Discourse of a Full Moon (Middle Length Sayings III, no.
109) we read that the Buddha, while he was staying near Sāvatthī, in
the palace of Migāra's mother, in the Eastern Monastery, asked the
monks: 

@quotation

``What do you think about this, monks? Is material shape permanent or
impermanent?''

``Impermanent, revered sir.''

``But is what is impermanent painful or is it pleasant?''

``Painful, revered sir.''

``And is it right to regard that which is impermanent, suffering, liable
to change, as, 'This is mine, this am I, this is myself'?''

``No, revered sir.''

@end quotation

The Buddha asked the same question about mental phenomena. 

Everything in our life is impermanent. Also what we call happiness is
impermanent @minus{}it is only a mental phenomenon which arises and then falls
away immediately. How can that which arises and falls away as soon as
it has arisen be real happiness? Everything in life, even happiness, is
therefore dukkha or unsatisfactory. What arises and falls away should
not be taken for self; everything is anattā or ``non-self''.
Impermanence, dukkha and anattā are three aspects of the truth, the
truth of all realities within ourselves and around ourselves. It may
take us a long time before we can experience things as they really are.
The only way to develop direct understanding of the truth is being
aware of the nāma and rūpa which appear, such as, for example, seeing,
hearing or thinking at this moment. 

The Buddha was always mindful and clearly conscious. He did not have
ignorance of any reality. When we realize how difficult mindfulness is
we deeply respect the great wisdom of the Buddha. The Buddha is called
the ``Awakened One'', because he is awakened to the truth. We read in the
Discourse with Sela (Middle Length Sayings II, no. 92) that the Buddha
said to Sela:

@quotation
``What is to be known is known by me, and to be developed is developed,
what is to be got rid of has been got rid of @minus{}therefore, brahman, am I
awake.''

@end quotation

The Buddha had, by his enlightenment, attained the greatest purity. He
had completely eradicated all defilements. The Buddha attained
enlightenment during his life in this world. He taught others to
develop in their daily lives the wisdom which can completely eradicate
defilements and all latent tendencies. The more we know about our own
defilements, including the more subtle defilements, and the more we see
how deeply rooted the clinging to the concept of self is, the more will
we realize the high degree of the Buddha's purity.

The Buddha was full of compassion for everybody. The fact that the
Buddha was free from defilements did not mean that he wanted to
dissociate himself from the world. On the contrary, he wanted to help
all beings who still had defilements to find the Path leading to true
understanding. People are inclined to think that Buddhism makes people
neglectful of their duties towards others and that it makes them
self-centred. This is not so. Buddhism enables one more fully to
perform one's duties and to serve other people in a more unselfish way.

The Buddha attained enlightenment for the happiness of the world. In the
Gradual Sayings (Book of the Ones, Ch XIII) we read that the Buddha
said to the monks:

Monks, there is one person whose birth into the world is for the welfare
of many folk, for the happiness of many folk; who is born out of
compassion for the world, for the profit, welfare and happiness of
devas and mankind. Who is that one person? It is a Tathāgata@footnote{
Literally, ``thus gone'', the Perfect One.} who is arahat, a fully
Enlightened One. This, monks, is that one person.

The more one understands the Buddha's teachings, the more one is
impressed by his compassion for everybody. The Buddha knew what it
meant to be free from all sorrow. Therefore he helped other beings to
attain this freedom as well. One can help people by kindness, by
generosity, and in many other ways. The most precious thing one can
give others is to show them the way to true peace. The Buddha proved
his great compassion to people by teaching them Dhamma.

When Buddhists pay respect to the Buddha statue they do not pray to a
Buddha in heaven, since the Buddha passed away completely. Buddhists
pay respect to the Buddha statue because they think with deep reverence
and gratefulness of the Buddha's virtues: of his wisdom, his purity and
his compassion. When we speak of virtues we think of good qualities in
someone's character. There are many degrees of good qualities however.
When the wisdom of him who follows the eightfold Path is developed to
such an extent that he can attain enlightenment, then his way of life
will have become purer and his compassion for others deeper. Wisdom is
not only theoretical knowledge of the truth, but realizing the truth in
one's life as well. The virtues of the Buddha were developed to such
degree that he not only attained enlightenment without the help of a
teacher, but was also able to teach the truth to others, so that by
following the right Path they could attain enlightenment. 

There were other Buddhas before the Buddha Gotama. All Buddhas find the
truth by themselves, without being led by others. However, there are
two different kinds of Buddhas: the ``Sammāsambuddha'', that is, a
``Universal Buddha'' or ``Perfectly Enlightened One''@footnote{Sammā means
thoroughly, rightly.}, and the ``Pacceka Buddha'' or ``Silent Buddha''.
The Sammāsambuddha has found the truth and is able to teach others as
well the way to enlightenment. The Pacceka Buddha has not accumulated
virtues to the same extent as the Sammā­sambuddha and thus he is not as
qualified in teaching others as the Sammāsambuddha. The Buddha Gotama
was a Sammā­sambuddha. There cannot be more than one Sammāsambuddha in
a Buddha era; neither can there be in that era Pacceka Buddhas. The
Buddha era in which we are living will be terminated when the Buddha's
teachings have disappeared completely. The Buddha foretold that the
further one is away from the time he lived, the more his teaching will
be misinterpreted and corrupted. His teachings will disappear
completely and then there will be a next Buddha, and so the next Buddha
era. The next Buddha will discover the truth again and he will teach
other beings the way to enlightenment.

Buddhists take their refuge in the Buddha. What does the word ``refuge''
mean? The Paramatthajotikā commentary speaks about the meaning of the
word ``refuge'':

@dots{}When people have gone for refuge, then by that very going for refuge
it combats, dispels, carries off, and stops their fear, anguish,
suffering, (risk of) unhappy destination (on rebirth), and
defilement@dots{}The going for refuge is the arising of cognizance with
confidence therein and giving preponderance thereto, from which
defilement is eliminated and eradicated, and which occurs in the mode
of taking that as the highest value@enddots{}

Going for refuge to the Buddha does not mean that the Buddha can
eradicate people's defilements. We read in the Mahā-Parinibbāna-sutta
(Dialogues of the Buddha II, no. 73) that, before his passing away, the
Buddha said to Ānanda:

@quotation

Now I am frail, Ānanda, old, aged, far gone in years. This is my
eightieth year and my life is spent@dots{}Therefore, Ānanda, be an
island to yourself, a refuge to yourself, seeking no external refuge;
with Dhamma as your island, Dhamma as your refuge, seeking no other
refuge.

@end quotation

The Buddha then explained that one takes one's refuge in the Dhamma by
developing the ``four Applications of Mindfulness'', that is, being
mindful of nāma and rūpa in order to develop right understanding of
them. This is the eightfold Path which leads to enlightenment. One can
depend only on oneself in following this Path, not on anyone else. 

The Buddha said that the Dhamma and the Vinaya would be his successor.
Today the Buddha is no longer with us, but we take our refuge in the
Buddha when we have confidence in his teachings and we consider it the
most important thing in life to practise what he taught.

@node The Dhamma
@chapter The Dhamma

The second of the Three Gems Buddhists take their refuge in is the
Dhamma. When they take their refuge in the Dhamma they say: ``Dhamma
saraṇa gacchāmi'', which means, ``I go for refuge to the Dhamma.''

What does the word ``dhamma'' mean? Most people think that dhamma only
means doctrine, but the word ``dhamma'' has several more meanings. Dhamma
means everything which is real, no matter whether it is good or bad.
Dhamma comprises, for example, seeing, sound, greed and honesty. We
cannot take our refuge in every dhamma; for instance we cannot take our
refuge in greed or hate.

Can we take refuge in our good deeds? The effect of a good deed is never
lost, since each good deed will bring its fruit accordingly. In the
Kindred Sayings (I, Sagāthā-vagga, Ch I, part 8, Slaughter Suttas, par 5)
we read that a deva (divine being) asks the Buddha how a man should
live so that he does not have to fear life in another world. The Buddha
answered:

@example

Let him but rightly set both speech and mind.
And by the body work no evil things.
If in a house well stored with goods he dwell,
Let him have faith@footnote{Confidence in wholesomeness.}, be gentle, share his goods
With others, and be affable of speech.
In these four qualities if he persist,
He need not fear life in another world.

@end example

A good deed can cause a happy rebirth such as birth in the human plane
of existence, or in a heavenly plane, and in that case one need not
fear life in another world. However, even a heavenly plane is not a
permanent refuge. Life in a heavenly plane may last very long, but it
is not permanent. There may be rebirth in unhappy planes after one's
lifespan in a happy plane is terminated, depending on which of one's
accumulated good and bad deeds, kusala kamma and akusala kamma, will
produce result@footnote{Kamma is volition, but the terms kusala kamma
and akusala kamma stand also for good action or evil action motivated
by wholesome or unwholesome volition. Deeds bring their results
accordingly; more precisely: the volition or intention which motivates
a deed is accumulated and can produce result later on. }. Each deed
will bring its own result: a wholesome deed will bring a pleasant
result and an unwholesome deed will bring an unpleasant result. Some
deeds may produce a result in this life, other deeds may produce result
in a future life. The accumulated unwholesome and wholesome deeds may
cause births in different planes of existence at different times. In
the Kindred Sayings (I, Sagāthā-vagga, Ch III, Kosala, Part 2, par 10,
Childless) we read about someone who gave alms to a Pacceka Buddha.
Because of this good deed he was reborn in heaven seven times and after
that in the human plane, which is also kusala vipāka. However, he
killed his nephew because he wanted his brother's fortune. This ill
deed caused him to be reborn in hell. Thus he received the results of
kusala kamma and of akusala kamma at different times.

So long as all defilements and latent tendencies have not been
eradicated, there will be rebirth in different planes of existence.
Even those who are reborn in heavenly planes still have defilements and
latent tendencies. Birth is sorrow, no matter in what plane; birth will
be followed by death. We read in the Kindred Sayings (II, Nidāna-vagga,
Ch XV, part 1, par 3, Tears) that the Buddha, while he was in the Jeta
Grove, near Sāvatthī, said to the monks:

Incalculable is the beginning, monks, of this faring on. The earliest
point is not revealed of the running on, faring on, of beings cloaked
in ignorance, tied to craving.

As to that, what do you think, monks? Which is greater, the flood of
tears shed by you crying and weeping as you fare on, run on this long
while, united as you have been with the undesirable, separated as you
have been from the desirable, or the waters in the four seas?

@dots{}For many a long day, monks, have you experienced the death of
mother, of son, of daughter, have you experienced the ruin of kinsfolk,
of wealth, the calamity of disease. Greater is the flood of tears shed
by you crying and weeping over one and all of these, as you fare on,
run on this many a long day, united with the undesirable, separated
from the desirable, than are the waters in the four seas.

Only when all defilements have been eradicated will there be no cause
any more which can produce a next life; that is the end of rebirth ,
and that means the end of all sorrow. Nibbāna is the end of rebirth
because nibbāna is the end of defilements@footnote{There are four
stages of enlightenment. At each of these stages nibbāna is experienced
and defilements are progressively eradicated. Only when the last stage
of enlightenment, the stage of the arahat, has been attained, there is
the end of defilements and there will be the end of rebirth. This will
be further explained in Ch. 8.} . Therefore one can truly take one's
refuge in nibbāna. In the suttas, nibbāna is called ``the deathless''. We
read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book I, Kindred Sayings on
the Way, I, Ignorance, par 7) that, when the Buddha was at Sāvatthī, a
monk said to him:

@quotation

`` 'The deathless! The deathless!', lord, is the saying. Pray, lord, what
is the deathless, and what the way to the deathless?''

``That which is the destruction of greed, the destruction of hatred, the
destruction of ignorance, monk @minus{}that is called 'the deathless'. This
same ariyan eightfold way is the way to the deathless.''

@end quotation

Nibbāna is the dhamma we can take our refuge in, nibbāna is included in
the second Gem. Nibbāna is a Gem of the highest value, because there is
nothing to be preferred to complete freedom from all sorrow, from
birth, old age and death. Nibbāna is real. If one has not yet attained
enlightenment, one has not experienced nibbāna. But if one follows the
right Path one may realize nibbāna, even during this life.

Nibbāna is the deathless, it is the end of the cycle of birth and death.
People may think that is not very desirable not to be born again. It
does not make much sense to speculate about nibbāna; if we have not
attained enlightenment we cannot imagine what nibbāna is like. At the
present time we can experience our defilements; we can experience the
sorrow which is caused in the world by greed, hatred and ignorance. We
read in the Kindred Sayings (I, Sagāthā-vagga, Ch III, Kosala, Part 3,
par 3, the World) that, when the Buddha was at Sāvatthī, King Pasenadi
asked him:

@quotation
``How many kinds of things, Lord, that happen in the world, make for
trouble, for suffering, for distress?''

``Three things, sire, happen of that nature. 

What are the three?

Greed, hatred and ignorance: these three make for trouble, for
suffering, for distress.''

@end quotation

Who does not want to be free from suffering, caused by greed hatred and
ignorance? Those who want to become free from all defilements take
refuge in nibbāna. What is the Path leading to nibbāna? Nibbāna cannot
be attained merely by wishing for it. Can people attain nibbāna by
doing good deeds? Even when one performs good deeds there can still be
the idea of self. When one does good deeds but there is no development
of right understanding of realities, the belief in a self and other
defilements cannot be eradicated. Thus, good deeds alone, without right
understanding, cannot lead to nibbāna. Only vipassanā can lead to the
attainment of nibbāna, to the eradication of defilements.

On may wonder whether it is necessary, in addition to developing
vipassanā, to do other good deeds. There is no self who can choose to
perform a particular kind of kusala. The Buddha encouraged us to
perform all kinds of kusala for which there is an opportunity.
Sometimes there is an opportunity for dāna, sometimes for sīla, at
other times for samatha or for vipassanā. Through the development of
vipassanā we will come to know our defilements, even the more subtle
ones. Then we will see the danger of defilements more clearly and
realize the benefit of developing the Path leading to their
eradication. If we observe the precepts or do other kinds of good deeds
with mindfulness of nāma and rūpa, we will learn that there is no self
who performs kusala and thus kusala will be purer. However, vipassanā
will not immediately transform one's character. It is most important to
develop right understanding of both kusala and akusala as only
conditioned realities, as non-self. 

The development of vipassanā takes many lives, because ignorance is
deeply accumulated. Most of the time we are ignorant and forgetful of
the nāma and rūpa which appear now through one of the five senses or
through the mind-door. We are used to thinking of realities which have
fallen away already a long time ago or of those which may present
themselves in the future. We should not expect to learn awareness in
one day or even within one year. We cannot tell how much progress is
made each day, because wisdom develops very gradually. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khandhā-vagga, Middle Fifty, Part
5, par 101, Adze-handle) that the Buddha, when he was at Sāvatthī, said
to the monks:

@quotation

By knowing, monks, by seeing is, I declare, the destruction of the
āsavas@footnote{Cankers or intoxicants, one group of defilements.
Defilements are classified into different groups.} , not by not
knowing, by not seeing@enddots{}

Suppose, monks, in a monk who lives neglectful of self-training there
should arise this wish: ''O that my heart were freed from the āsavas
without grasping.'' Yet for all that his heart is not freed from the
āsavas. What is the cause of that?

It must be said that it is his neglect of self-training. Self-training
in what? In the four applications of mindfulness@dots{}in the ariyan
eightfold Path.

@dots{}in the monk who dwells attentive to self-training there would not
arise such a wish as this: ``O that my heart were freed from the āsavas
without grasping''; and yet his heart is freed from them. What is the
cause of that?

It must be said it is his attention to self-training@dots{}Just as if,
monks, when a carpenter or carpenter's apprentice looks upon his
adze-handle and sees thereon his thumb-mark and his finger-marks he
does not thereby know: ''So and so much of my adze-handle has been worn
away today, so much yesterday, so much at other times.'' But he knows
the wearing away of it just by its wearing away.

Even so monks, the monk who dwells attentive to self-training has not
this knowledge: ``So and so much of the āsavas has been worn away today,
so much yesterday, so much at other times.`` But he knows the wearing
away of them just by their wearing away.


@end quotation

When wisdom is highly developed, nibbāna can be realized. There are four
stages of enlightenment and at each stage nibbāna is experienced and
defilements are progressively eradicated. Defilements are so deeply
rooted that they can only be eradicated stage by stage. At the first
stage the wrong view of self is eradicated, but there are still
attachment, aversion and ignorance. Only at the last stage of
enlightenment, the stage of the arahat, are all defilements and latent
tendencies eradicated completely. When one has attained the stage of
the arahat there will be no more rebirth.

The citta which experiences nibbāna is a ``supramundane'' or lokuttara
citta. There are two types of citta for each of the four stages of
enlightenment: lokuttara kusala citta and its result, the
``fruition-consciousness''; thus there are eight types of lokuttara
citta. Nibbāna and the eight types of lokuttara citta which experience
nibbāna are included in the second Gem, the Dhamma to which one goes
for refuge@footnote{Nibbāna and the eight lokuttara cittas are the
``nine supramundane dhammas'', ``nava lokuttara dhammas''.}. When we take
our refuge in the second Gem, we consider it the goal of our life to
develop the wisdom which can eventually eradicate all defilements. 

There is still another Dhamma included in the second Gem, namely the
Dhamma in the sense of the Buddha's teachings. We can take our refuge
in the Buddha's teachings. The teachings can lead people to the truth
if they study them with right understanding and if they practise
according to what is taught. We should study the whole of the Buddha's
teachings. If one studies only a few suttas one will not clearly
understand what the Buddha taught. Many times a sutta merely alludes to
things which are explained in detail in other parts of the Tipiṭaka,
the ``three Collections'' of the scriptures. It is useful to study the
commentaries to the Tipiṭaka as well, because they explain the Buddha's
teachings. The teachings are our guide since the Buddha passed away.

We read in the Discourse to Gopaka-Moggallāna (Middle Length Sayings
III, no. 108) that after the Buddha's passing away a brahman asked
Ānanda what the cause was of the unity of the monks. He said:


@quotation


``Is there, good Ānanda, even one monk who was designated by the
good Gotāma, saying: 'After my passing this one will be your support',
and to whom you might have recourse now?''

``There is not even one monk, brahman, who was designated by the Lord who
knew and saw, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, saying: 'After my
passing this one will be your support', and to whom we might have
recourse now.''

``But is there even one monk, Ānanda, who is agreed upon by the
Order and designated by a number of monks who are elders, saying:
'After the Lord's passing this one will be our support', and to whom
you might have recourse now?''

``There is not even one monk, brahman, who is agreed upon by the Order@enddots{}
and to whom we might have recourse now.''

``But as you are thus without support, good Ānanda, what is the
cause of your unity?''

``We brahman, are not without support, we have a support, brahman. Dhamma
is the support.''

@end quotation


In the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Threes, Ch VI, par 60, Sangārava) we
read that the Buddha spoke to the brahman Sangārava about three kinds
of ``marvels'': the marvel of ``superpower'', such as diving into the earth
or walking on water, the marvel of thought-reading and the marvel of
teaching. The Buddha asked him which marvel appealed to him most.
Sangārava answered:

@quotation
Of these marvels, master Gotama, the marvel of super-power@dots{}seems to
me of the nature of an illusion. Then again as to the marvel of
thought-reading@dots{}this also, master Gotama, seems to me of the nature
of an illusion. But as to the marvel of teaching@dots{}of these three
marvels this one appeals to me as the more wonderful and excellent.
@end quotation

The teachings are the greatest miracle because they can change a
person's life. Through the Dhamma one is able to follow the Path which
eventually leads to the end of all sorrow, to the end of the cycle of
birth and death. The Buddha's teachings do not appeal to everyone. Many
people find it difficult to think in a way which is different from the
way they used to think. They do not like the truth of non-self. They
want to be master of their mind even though they can find out that this
is impossible. The Buddha knew how difficult it is for people to change
their way of thinking. In the Discourse to Vacchagotta on Fire (Middle
Length Sayings II, no. 72) we read that the Buddha, when he was staying
near Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove, taught Dhamma to Vacchagotta who had
wrong views. Vacchagotta, after having brought forward his wrong views
and having listened to the Buddha's reply, said that he was at a loss
and bewildered on account of what the Buddha had said to him. The
Buddha replied:

@quotation
You ought to be at a loss, Vaccha, you ought to be bewildered. For,
Vaccha, this dhamma is deep, difficult to see, difficult to understand,
peaceful, excellent, beyond dialectic, subtle, intelligible to the
wise; but it is hard for you who are of another view, another
allegiance, another objective, of a different observance, and under a
different teacher.
@end quotation

Dhamma is deep and difficult to understand. People cannot understand
Dhamma if they still cling to their own views. If they would really
study the teachings and apply what they have learnt, they could find
out for themselves whether one can take one's refuge in the Dhamma.
When we have verified in our life that what the Buddha taught is
reality, even if we cannot yet experience everything he taught, we do
not want to exchange our understanding for anything else in life. If we
develop right understanding of realities we will have Dhamma as a
support. Thus we take refuge in the Dhamma. 

@node The Sangha
@chapter The Sangha 

The Sangha is the third of the ``Three Gems''. When Buddhists take their
refuge in the Sangha they say: ``Sangha saraṇa gacchāmi'', which
means, ``I go for refuge to the Sangha''. The word ``sangha'' literally
means ``congregation'' or ``community''. It is the word generally used for
the order of monks. However, the word ``sangha'' in connection with the
third Gem has a different meaning. The third Gem, the Sangha we take
our refuge in, is the ``ariyan Sangha'', the community of all those who
have attained enlightenment. ``Ariyan'' or ``noble person'' is the name
which denotes all those who have attained one of the four stages of
enlightenment, no matter whether they are monks, nuns (bhikkhunī's),
unmarried lay-followers or married lay-followers. In the suttas we read
that countless men and women lay-followers, single and married, attained
enlightenment@footnote{See, for example, Middle Length Sayings II, no.
73, ``Greater Discourse to Vacchagotta''.}. 

In order to understand what enlightenment is, we should first know more
about the accumulation of defilements. All kinds of defilements which
arise are conditioned; they are conditioned by akusala in the past.
Akusala citta which arises now conditions akusala citta again in the
future. Each citta which arises falls away completely and thus we may
wonder how there can be accumulation of defilements. Each citta which
arises falls away but it conditions the succeeding citta and this again
the next one. Since our life is a continuous series of cittas
succeeding one another, the process of accumulation continues in this
series of cittas, going on from moment to moment, from birth to death,
and from one life to the next life. That is the reason why there are
conditions at present for all kinds of defilements; they can arise at
any time when there are the right conditions. 

The defilements which have been accumulated are very deeply rooted, and
they can only be eradicated in stages, at the different stages of
enlightenment. First the latent tendency of the clinging to the concept
of self has to be eradicated. The belief in a self can be eradicated by
understanding what it is we take for self, in developing vipassanā or
right understanding of realities. What we call ``my body'' are only
physical phenomena, rūpas, which arise and fall away and which we
cannot control. We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Middle Fifty I, par
59, The Five) that the Buddha said to his first five disciples in the
Deerpark of Vārānasi: 

@quotation
Body, monks, is not the self. If body, monks, were the self, then body
would not be involved in sickness, and one could say of body: ``Thus let
my body be. Thus let my body not be.''
@end quotation

The same is said about mental phenomena. What we take for ``my mind'' are
only mental phenomena, nāmas, which arise and fall away and which are
beyond control. There is no self who can direct them. The wrong view of
self we have accumulated throughout countless lives can be eliminated
only very gradually. The wisdom becomes keener as successive stages of
insight are attained during the development of vipassanā. When the
first stage of enlightenment is attained and nibbāna is experienced for
the first time, the wrong view of self is eradicated completely and
there is no more doubt about nāma and rūpa. 

The first stage of enlightenment is the stage of the ``stream­winner'', in
Pāli: ``sotāpanna''. We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khandhavagga,
Ch XXV, Kindred Sayings on Entering, par 1, The Eye) that the Buddha said
to the monks: 

@quotation
The eye, monks, is impermanent, changeable, becoming otherwise. The ear,
monks, is impermanent, changeable. So is the nose, the tongue, the
body, and the mind. It is impermanent, changeable, becoming
otherwise@enddots{}

He, monks, who thus knows, thus sees these doctrines, is called
``streamwinner, saved from destruction, assured, bound for
enlightenment''.

@end quotation

The sotāpanna, the streamwinner, is bound for the last stage of
enlightenment, which is the stage of the arahat. At the first stage of
enlightenment, the stage of the sotāpanna, nibbāna is experienced and
defilements are eradicated, but not all defilements are eradicated yet.
There are still lobha, dosa and moha. The sotāpanna knows that there
are still conditions for akusala cittas, but he does not take them for
self. Although he still has defilements, he will never transgress the
five precepts; it has become his nature to observe them. He cannot
commit a deed which can cause rebirth in one of the woeful planes; he
is ``saved from destruction'' as we read in the above-quoted sutta. Those
who are not ariyans cannot be sure that they will not be reborn in a
woeful plane of existence, even if they have done many good deeds in
this life. One may have committed an evil deed in a past life which may
cause rebirth in an unhappy plane. Only ariyans can be sure that they
will not be reborn in an unhappy plane. 

The sotāpanna has an unshakable confidence in the ``Three Gems'': in the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. He has no doubts about the Path the
Buddha taught; he cannot delude himself about the right practice of
vipassanā. We are deluded about the right practice so long as we cling
to a self, when we want to induce the arising of awareness or when we
cling to results we are hoping for. The sotāpanna, however, is firmly
established on the Path to the last stage of enlightenment, the stage
of the arahat.

In the scriptures nibbāna has been described as the end of lobha, dosa
and moha, as the end of dukkha, as the end of rebirth, as the
deathless. When one reads this one may think that the attainment of
enlightenment and the experience of nibbāna only pertains to the arahat
who has realized the fourth and last stage of enlightenment and who
will not be reborn after he has passed away. However, at each of the
four stages of enlightenment nibbāna is experienced and defilements are
eradicated, until they are all eradicated at the last stage of
enlightenment. The ariyans who have not reached the stage of the arahat
still have defilements and they still have conditions to be reborn, but
they are sure to reach the end of defilements and the end of rebirth. 

The sotāpanna has experienced nibbāna. It is difficult to understand and
define what nibbāna is. Nibbāna is the unconditioned dhamma, it does
not arise and fall away. All realities we experience in daily life
arise because of conditions and then fall away immediately. What arises
and falls away is dukkha, suffering or unsatisfactory. All conditioned
realities are impermanent, dukkha and anattā, non-self. Since nibbāna
does not arise and fall away it is not impermanent and thus not dukkha.
Nibbāna is not a person or self, it is anattā. Thus, all realities,
including nibbāna, are anattā. When paññā has been developed to the
degree that conditioned realities are clearly understood as they are,
as impermanent, dukkha and anattā, there can be enlightenment, the
experience of nibbāna. Nibbāna is the object of lokuttara citta,
supramundane citta, as we have seen in chapter 7. The lokuttara cittas
which experience nibbāna arise and then fall away immediately, they are
impermanent. After they have fallen away other types of cittas arise
which are not lokuttara cittas. So long as one has not eradicated all
defilements akusala cittas are bound to arise again. 

The fact that the sotāpanna has attained enlightenment does not mean
that he cannot continue all his daily activities. The sotāpanna can
live with husband or wife and lead a family life. Ariyans who have not
attained the third stage of enlightenment, the stage of the
``non-returner'' or ``anāgāmī'', still have attachment to sense objects. As
regards the arahat, he has no inclinations at all for the layman's
life. 

The sotāpanna does not take any nāma or rūpa for self, but there is
still attachment, aversion and ignorance; he still has conceit.
Therefore, he has to continue with the development of vipassanā. We
read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khandhā-vagga, Last Fifty, II, par 122,
Virtue) that Mahā-Koṭṭhita asked Sāriputta what would be the object of
awareness for a virtuous monk who has not realized any stage of
enlightenment yet, or for a sotāpanna, or for those who have realized
the subsequent stages of enlightenment. Sāriputta explained that the
object of paññā is the five ``khandhas of grasping''@footnote{Khandha is
translated as ``group'' or ``aggregate''. The five khandhas are: the
khandha of rūpas, of feelings, of perception, of ``formations'' or
``activities'' (all mental factors other than feeling and perception),
and of consciousness. Thus, the five khandhas are all nāmas and rūpas
of our life. }, which are all the nāmas and rūpas in and around
oneself. Sāriputta said:

@quotation
``The five khandhas of grasping, friend Koṭṭhita, are the conditions
which should be pondered with method by a virtuous monk, as being
impermanent, suffering, sick, as a boil, as a dart, as pain, as
ill-health, as alien, as transitory, empty and not self@enddots{}

Indeed, friend, it is possible for a virtuous monk so pondering with
method these five khandhas of grasping to realize the fruits of
stream-winning.'' 

``But, friend Sāriputta, what are the things which should be pondered
with method by a monk who is a sotāpanna?''

``By a monk who is a sotāpanna, friend Koṭṭhita, it is these same five
khandhas of grasping which should be so pondered.

Indeed, friend, it is possible for a monk who is a sotāpanna@dots{}by so
pondering these five khandhas@dots{}to realize the fruits of
once-returning@footnote{The once-returner or sakadāgāmī has realized
the second stage of enlightenment. }.``

``But, friend Sāriputta, what are the things which should be pondered
with method by a monk who is a once-returner?''

``By one who is a once-returner, friend, it is these same five khandhas
which should be pondered with method.

Indeed it is possible, friend, for one who is a once-returner, by so
pondering to realize the fruits of non-returning@footnote{The
non-returner or anāgāmī has realized the third stage of enlightenment.
}.'' 

``But, friend Sāriputta, what are the things which should be pondered
with method by one who is a non-returner?''

``By such a one, friend Koṭṭhita, it is these five khandhas of grasping
which should be so pondered. It is possible, friend, for a non-returner
by so pondering to realize the fruits of arahatship.''

``But what, friend Sāriputta, are the things which should be pondered
with method by one who is an arahat?''

``By an arahat, friend Koṭṭhita, these five khandhas should be pondered
with method as being impermanent, suffering, sick, as a boil, as a
dart, as ill-health, as alien, transitory, void and not self.

For the arahat, friend, there is nothing further to be done, nor is
there return to upheaping of what is done. Nevertheless, these things,
if practised and enlarged, conduce to a happy existence and to
self-possession even in this present life.''

@end quotation

The ariyan of the second stage, the once-returner or sakadāgāmī, has not
eradicated all attachment and aversion, but they have become
attenuated. He still has ignorance, which is only completely eradicated
by the arahat. The ariyan of the third stage, the non-returner or
anāgāmī, has eradicated aversion and he has eradicated attachment to
the things experienced through the five senses, but he has not
eradicated all forms of clinging; he still clings to rebirth and he
still has conceit. 

Ariyans who are not yet arahats can still have conceit, although they
have no wrong view of self. They may be inclined to pride while they
compare themselves with others. When a person thinks himself better
than, equal to or less than someone else, there can, even if it is
true, be conceit. Why should we compare ourselves with others? In the
Khemaka-sutta (Kindred Sayings III, Khandhā-vagga, Middle Fifty, Part
4, par 89) we read that the monk Khemaka, who was staying in Jujube Tree
Park, was afflicted by sickness. Some other monks who were staying near
Kosambī in Ghosita Park, asked the monk Dāsaka to enquire after his
health. After he gave the message that his health was not improving,
the other monks told Dāsaka to ask Khemaka whether he still took
anything for self. When Khemaka had told Dāsaka that he did not take
anything for self, the other monks concluded that Khemaka must be an
arahat. Khemaka answered Dāsaka:

@quotation
``Though, friends, I discern in the five khandhas of grasping no self nor
anything pertaining to the self, yet am I not arahat, nor one in whom
the āsavas (cankers) are destroyed. Though, friend, I see that I have
got the idea of 'I am' in the five khandhas of grasping, yet do I not
discern that I am this 'I am'.''

Then the venerable Dāsaka returned to the monks with that message and
reported the words of the venerable Khemaka (and those monks sent this
further message): ``As to this 'I am', friend Khemaka, of which you
speak, what do you mean by this 'I am'? Do you speak of 'I am' as body
or as distinct from the body? As feeling, or as distinct from feeling?
As perception@dots{}as the ``activities''@dots{}as consciousness, or as
distinct from consciousness? As to this 'I am', what do you mean by
it?'' (So the venerable Dāsaka went again and took the message in these
words.)

``Enough, friend Dāsaka. What boots this running to and fro! Fetch my
staff. I will go myself to these monks.''

So the venerable Khemaka, leaning on his staff, came to those monks.
When he got there, he greeted them, and exchanging the courtesies of
civil words, sat down at one side. As he thus sat, the elders thus
spoke to the venerable Khemaka:

``As to this 'I am', friend Khemaka, of which you speak, what do you mean
by it? Do you speak of it as body or as distinct from body@dots{}as
consciousness, or as distinct from consciousness?''

``No friends, I do not say, 'I am body or feeling, or perception, or the
'activities' or consciousness, or as distinct from these and from
consciousness.' Though, friends, I see that I have got the idea of 'I
am' in the five khandhas of grasping, yet I do not discern that I am
this 'I am'. Just as, friends, in the case of the scent of a blue
lotus, or a white lotus, if one should say: 'The scent belongs to the
petals or the colour or the fibres of it', would he be rightly
describing the scent?''

``Surely not, friend.''

``Then how would he be right in describing it?''

``Surely, friend, by speaking of the scent of the flower.''

``Even so, friends, I do not speak of the 'I am' as a body, or as feeling
and so forth. Nevertheless I see that in these five khandhas of
grasping I have got the idea of 'I am'; yet I do not discern that I am
this 'I am'. Though, friends, an ariyan disciple has put away the five
lower fetters@footnote{Fetters or sa—yojanas are a group of
defilements. The non-returner or anāgāmī has eradicated the five lower
fetters, which include wrong views, clinging to sense objects and
aversion. The arahat has eradicated the five higher fetters which
include conceit, craving for rebirth which is the result of jhāna,
restlessness and ignorance.} , yet there remains in him a subtle
remnant from among the five khandhas of grasping, a subtle remnant of
the I am-conceit, of the I am-desire, of the lurking tendency to think
'I am', still not removed from him. Later on he lives contemplating the
rise and fall of the five khandhas of grasping, seeing thus: 'Such is
body, such is the arising of body, such is the ceasing of it. Such is
feeling@dots{}perception@dots{}the activities@dots{}such is consciousness, the
arising of it and the ceasing of it'. 

In this way, as he lives in the contemplation of the five khandhas of
grasping, that subtle remnant of the I am-conceit, of the I am-desire,
that lurking tendency to think 'I am', which was still not removed from
him @minus{}that is now removed. 

Suppose, friends, there is a dirty, soiled cloth, and the owners give it
to a washerman, and he rubs it smooth with salt-earth, or lye or
cowdung, and rinses it in pure clean water. Now, though that cloth be
clean, utterly cleansed, yet there hangs about it, still unremoved, the
smell of the salt-earth or lye or cowdung. The washerman returns it to
the owners, and they lay it up in a sweet-scented coffer. Thus that
smell@dots{}is now utterly removed@enddots{}''

@end quotation

Further on we read:

@quotation
Now when this teaching was thus expounded the hearts of as many as sixty
monks were utterly set free from the āsavas, and so was it also with
the heart of the venerable Khemaka.
@end quotation

The arahat has eradicated all defilements and latent tendencies. He will
not be reborn when his life is terminated. 

How can we find out who is an ariyan? There is no way to know who is an
ariyan, unless we have become enlightened ourselves. It cannot be known
from someone's outward appearance whether he is an ariyan or not.
People who are very amiable and peaceful are not necessarily ariyans.
However, we can take our refuge in the ariyan Sangha even if we do not
personally know any ariyans. We can think of the virtues of the
ariyans, no matter whether they are in this plane of existence or in
other planes. The ariyans prove that there is a way to the end of
defilements. We should know what the condition is for the end of
defilements: the development of wisdom. The monks, nuns, men and women
lay-followers who were ariyans in the Buddha's time proved that what the
Buddha taught can be realized in daily life. The Buddha did not teach
abstract ideas, he taught reality. Should those who want to realize the
truth not walk the same Path the ariyans walked, even if they still
have a long way to go?

The ariyans understood very clearly that we cannot seek deliverance from
our defilements outside ourselves. Defilements can only be eradicated
where they arise: within ourselves. If we want to eradicate defilements
we should follow the eightfold Path which is the ``Middle Way''. In order
to follow the ``Middle Way'' we do not have to change our daily life, we
do not have to follow a particular life-style or difficult practices.
We can be aware of nāma and rūpa during our daily activities. We will
experience that this may be more difficult than the practices of an
ascetic. It is harder to overcome the clinging to a self when we are
seeing, hearing or thinking, than to endure bodily hardship. The
development of wisdom is a life task. We need much courage and
perseverance in order to continue to be aware of realities of daily
life.

When we take our refuge in the ariyan Sangha we are expressing our
confidence in the Buddha's Path, through which we may realize what the
Sangha has realized. We take our refuge in the Sangha also when we pay
respect to the monks, no matter whether they are ariyans or not,
because the goal of monkhood is to apply what the Buddha taught in
order to realize the truth and to try to help other people as well to
realize the truth. Thus the monks remind us of the ``Three Gems'': the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha.

@node Death
@chapter Death

It is a reality of life that we are bound to lose those who are dear to
us. When a relative or one of our friends dies we feel much grief and
we find it difficult to bear our loss. The Buddha's teachings can help
us to face reality, to see things as they are. Many times the Buddha
spoke about the sorrow caused by the loss of dear people.

We read in the Discourse on Born of Affection (Middle Length Sayings II, 87):

@quotation
Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Sāvatthī in the
Jeta Grove in Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now at that time
the dear and beloved little only son of a certain householder had
passed away. After he had passed away (the father) had no inclination
for work or for food. Going constantly to the cemetery, he wailed:
``Where are you, little only son? Where are you, little only son?'' Then
that householder approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted
the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. The Lord spoke thus to
that householder as he was sitting down at a respectful distance:

``Do you not have, householder, controlling faculties for stilling your
own mind? There is a change in your faculties.''

``But how could there be no change in my faculties, Lord? For, Lord, my
dear and beloved little only son has passed away@enddots{}''

``That is just it, householder. For, householder, grief, sorrow,
suffering, lamentation and despair are born of affection, originate in
affection.''

``But for whom Lord, could this hold good in this way: 'Grief, sorrow,
suffering, lamentation and despair are born of affection, originate in
affection'? For, Lord, bliss and happiness are born of affection,
originate in affection.''

Then the householder, not rejoicing in what the Lord had said,
repudiating it, rising from his seat, departed@enddots{}

@end quotation

The householder could not grasp the deep meaning of the Buddha's words.
We should try to understand what the Buddha meant. We should try to
understand what the Buddha taught about the world, about ourselves,
about life and death. The Buddha summarised his teachings in the ``Four
Noble Truths''. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book XII, Kindred Sayings
about the Truths, Ch II, par 1) that the Buddha explained the ``Four Noble
Truths'' (ariya sacca) to his first five disciples in the Deerpark in
Vārānasi. The first ``Noble Truth'' is the Truth of ``dukkha'' which can be
translated as suffering or unsatisfactoriness. The Buddha said:

@quotation
Now this, monks, is the ariyan truth about dukkha: 

Birth is dukkha, decay is dukkha, sickness is dukkha, death is dukkha;
likewise sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and despair. To be
conjoined with things we dislike, to be separated from things we like
that also is dukkha. Not to get what one wants @minus{}that also is dukkha. In
a word, the five khandhas which are based on grasping are dukkha.

@end quotation

The five khandhas, which are the mental phenomena and the physical
phenomena in and around ourselves, are dukkha. One may wonder why they
are dukkha. We take the mind for self, but what we call our mind are
only mental elements or nāmas which arise and then fall away
immediately. We take the body for self, but what we call our body are
only physical elements or rūpas which arise and fall away. When we do
not know the truth we think that these phenomena can stay; we take them
for self. We might for instance think that sadness stays, but there is
not only sadness, there are many other phenomena such as seeing,
hearing and thinking. What we think is a long time of sadness is, in
reality, many different phenomena succeeding one another; none of these
phenomena stays.

Phenomena which are impermanent are not real happiness; so they are
dukkha. Although dukkha is often translated as ``suffering'', it is not
only an unhappy feeling; the first ``Noble Truth'' pertains to all
phenomena which arise and fall away. There is not anything in our life
which is not dukkha. Even happy feeling is dukkha; it does not last.

The second ``Noble Truth'' is the origin of dukkha, which is craving. The
same sutta states:

@quotation
Now this, monks, is the ariyan truth about the arising of dukkha: It is
that craving that leads back to birth, along with the lure and the lust
that lingers longingly now here, now there: namely the craving for
sensual pleasure, the craving to be born again, the craving for
existence to end. Such, monks, is the ariyan truth about the arising of
dukkha.
@end quotation

So long as there is craving in any form there will be a condition for
life, for the arising of nāma and rūpa. Thus, there will be dukkha. 

The third ``Noble Truth'' is the cessation of dukkha, which is nibbāna. We
read in the above quoted sutta:
@quotation
And this, monks, is the ariyan truth about the ceasing of dukkha:

Verily it is the utter passionless cessation of, the giving up, the
forsaking, the release from, the absence of longing for this craving. 
@end quotation

Craving is the origin of dukkha, whereas when there is the cessation of
craving there will be the extinction of rebirth and thus of dukkha.
Nibbāna is the end of dukkha. The arahat has, at the attainment of
enlightenment eradicated all craving and thus for him there are no more
conditions for rebirth, and that means the end of dukkha@footnote{The
ariyans who are not arahats have also at the attainment of
enlightenment experienced nibbāna and eradicated defilements, but there
are four stages of enlightenment and at these stages defilements are
progressively eradicated, as we have seen in Ch 8. The ariyans who are
not arahats are sure to reach arahatship. The sotāpanna will not be
reborn more than seven times; thus, there is still rebirth for him but
he will reach the end of rebirth. }. 

We read in the same sutta about the fourth ``Noble Truth'': 

@quotation
Now this, monks, is the ariyan truth about the practice that leads to
the ceasing of dukkha: 

Verily it is the ariyan eightfold way, namely: Right understanding,
right thinking, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.
@end quotation

The eightfold Path (ariya-magga) is the development of right
understanding of all phenomena which appear in our daily life. We come
to know the world in and around ourselves, not through speculation, but
from our own experience.

How do we experience the world? We experience the world through seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, receiving impressions through the bodysense
and through the mind. Everything we experience through the doors of the
five senses and through the mind-door is extremely short, because all
phenomena which arise fall away immediately. When we see, there is the
world of visible object, but it does not last, it falls away again.
When we hear, there is the world of sound, but it is impermanent.
Likewise the world of smell, the world of taste, the world of tangible
object and the world of mental objects; none of these worlds lasts.

In the Visuddhimagga (VIII, 39) we read about the shortness of the
world:
@quotation
@dots{}in the ultimate sense the life-moment of living beings is extremely
short, being only as much as the occurrence of a single conscious
moment. Just as a chariot wheel, when it is rolling, rolls (that is,
touches the ground) only on one point of (the circumference of) its
tyre, and, when it is at rest, rests only on one point, so too, the
life of living beings lasts only for a single conscious moment. When
that consciousness has ceased, the being is said to have ceased@enddots{}

@end quotation

@example

Life, person, pleasure, pain@minus{}just these alone
Join in one conscious moment that flicks by.
Ceased khandhas of those dead or alive
Are all alike, gone never to return.
No (world is) born if (consciousness is) not
Produced, when that is present, then it lives; 
When consciousness dissolves, the world is dead@enddots{}

@end example

What we call death is not really different from what happens at any
moment of consciousness. Each moment a citta falls away there is death
of citta. Each citta which arises falls away completely but it
conditions the next citta. The last citta of this life, the
dying-consciousness (cuti-citta), is succeeded by the first citta of
the next life, the rebirth-consciousness (paṭisandhi-citta). There is
no self at any moment of our life and thus there is no self or soul
which travels from this life to the next life.

It is ignorance which causes us to think and behave as if the body and
the mind were permanent. We are attached to the body and to the mind
and we take them for self. We think that it is self who sees, hears,
thinks and moves around. The clinging to self causes sorrow. We wish to
be master of our body and our mind; we wish to control our life and to
experience only pleasant things. When we are confronted with old age,
sickness and death we are very sad. Those who are ignorant of reality
cannot grasp the Buddha's words that sorrow originates in attachment.
This is in fact the second ``Noble Truth'', the truth about the
origination of dukkha which is craving. We should realize that all
nāmas and rūpas which arise are impermanent, dukkha and anattā
(non-self). 

The Buddha pointed out the impermanence of phenomena in many different
ways. He spoke about the impermanence of the body in order to help
people to become detached from the concept of ``my body''. He spoke about
the contemplation of the foulness of the body, and he recommended
meditations on corpses in different stages of dissolution. We read in
the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 10):

And again, monks, as a monk might see a body thrown aside in a cemetery,
dead for one day or for two days or for three days, swollen,
discoloured, decomposing; he focuses on this body itself@footnote{His
own body.}, thinking: ``This body, too, is of a similar nature, a
similar constitution, it has not got past that (state of things).''

The Visuddhimagga (Ch VI, 88) explains:
@quotation
@dots{}For a living body is just as foul as a dead one, only the
characteristic of foulness is not evident in a living body, being
hidden by adventitious embellishments.
@end quotation

In order that people might realize the foulness of the living body as
well, the Buddha spoke about the ``Parts of the Body''. We read in the
Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta:

@quotation
And again, monks, a monk reflects on precisely this body itself, encased
in skin and full of various impurities, from the soles of the feet up
and from the crown of the head down, that: ``There is connected with
this body hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin,
flesh, sinews, bones, marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, membranes, spleen,
lungs, intestines, mesentary, stomach, excrement, bile, phlegm, pus,
blood, sweat, fat, tears, serum, saliva, mucus, synovic fluid, urine.''

@end quotation

Reflections on the foulness of the body can help us to become less
attached to it, but the most effective way to see the body as it really
is, is awareness and direct understanding of the rūpa-elements which
constitute the body. We read in the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta that the Buddha
spoke about the body in terms of the four elements:

@quotation
And again, monks, a monk reflects on this body according to how it is
placed or disposed in respect of the elements, thinking: ``In this body
there is the element of extension, the element of cohesion, the element
of heat, the element of motion.''
@end quotation

The element of extension or solidity (Earth) appears in the
characteristics of hardness and softness, the element of cohesion
(Water) in the characteristics of fluidity and cohesion, the element of
heat (Fire) in the characteristics of heat and cold, the element of
motion (Wind) in the characteristics of motion or oscillation and
pressure. These elements are the same, no matter whether we experience
them in dead matter or in the body. Both dead matter and the body are
only elements which are impermanent and non-self. 

We should know the world as it really is by experiencing different
characteristics of nāma and rūpa when they present themselves through
the five sense-doors and through the mind-door. For example, when the
characteristic of heat presents itself through the bodysense, it can be
object of awareness. When softness appears it can be object of
awareness. In this way we will get to know different characteristics of
reality through our own experience and we will learn to see them as
elements. 

It is important to know different characteristics of realities when they
present themselves in order to eliminate the clinging to the concept of
self. We may think that the softness of the body belongs to ``my body''.
When we learn to be mindful of the characteristic of softness more
often we will find out that softness is a characteristic which is the
same in dead matter and in the body. We will learn through experience
that it is a characteristic which does not know or experience anything;
that it is rūpa and not self. Thus we will become less attached to the
concept of ``my body''. When we are aware of realities such as seeing,
sadness, happiness and thinking, we will learn that they are only
different types of nāma which arise and fall away. They are dukkha. The
eye is dukkha, seeing is dukkha, the feelings which arise on account of
what is seen are dukkha.

It does not appeal to everybody to be mindful of nāma and rūpa as they
appear in daily life. However, we have to consider what we really want
in life. Do we want to continue being ignorant and taking body and mind
for self? Do we want to live in darkness or do we want to develop
wisdom so that there will be an end to dukkha? If we decide that we
want to walk the way leading to the end of dukkha, we must develop
wisdom in our daily life: when we see, hear or think, when we feel sad
and when we feel happy. This is the only way to understand dukkha, the
arising of dukkha, the ceasing of dukkha and the way leading to the
ceasing of dukkha. When we realize how deeply rooted our ignorance is
and how strong the attachment to the self, we will be motivated to
learn to be mindful of nāma and rūpa.

The Buddha often spoke about mindfulness of death. He spoke about death
in order to remind people of the impermanence of each moment. Life is
extremely short and thus we should not waste any time, but we should
learn to develop understanding of the present moment so that ignorance
of realities can be eliminated. 

Ignorance cannot be eradicated within a short time. Only when one has
attained the fourth and last stage of enlightenment, the stage of the
arahat, are there no more defilements; only then ignorance is
completely eradicated. We read in the Mahā-Parinibbāna-sutta (Dialogues
of the Buddha II, no. 16, Ch VI, 10,11)@footnote{I have used the
translation of the Wheel Publication no. 67, 68, 69, Buddhist
Publication Society, Sri Lanka.} that when the Buddha passed away
those who still had conditions for sorrow wept:

@quotation
Then, when the Bhagavā@footnote{The Buddha.} had passed away, some
monks, not yet freed from passion, lifted up their arms and wept; and
some, flinging themselves on the ground, rolled from side to side and
wept, lamenting: ``Too soon has the Bhagavā come to his parinibbāna! Too
soon has the Happy One come to his parinibbāna! Too soon has the Eye of
the World vanished from sight!''

But the monks who were freed from passion, mindful and clearly
comprehending, reflected in this way: ``Impermanent are all compounded
things. How could this be otherwise?''

And the venerable Anuruddha addressed the monks, saying: ``Enough,
friends! Do not grieve, do not lament! For has not the Bhagavā declared
before, that with all that is dear and beloved there must be change,
separation and severance? Of that which has arisen, has come into
being, is compounded and subject to decay, how can one say: 'May it not
come to dissolution' ?''

@end quotation

We read in the same sutta (Ch II, 32) that prior to his passing away the
Buddha said to Ānanda:

@quotation
Now I am frail, Ānanda, old, aged, far gone in years. This is my
eightieth year and my life is spent@dots{}Therefore, Ānanda, be an
island to yourself, a refuge to yourself, seeking no external refuge;
with Dhamma as your island, Dhamma as your refuge, seeking no other
refuge.

And how, Ānanda, is a monk an island to himself, a refuge to
himself, seeking no external refuge; with Dhamma as his island, Dhamma
as his refuge, seeking no other refuge?

When he dwells contemplating the body in the body, earnestly, clearly
comprehending, and mindfully, after having overcome desire and sorrow
in regard to the world; he dwells contemplating feeling in the
feelings, mind in the mind, and mental objects in the mental objects,
earnestly, clearly comprehending, and mindfully, after having overcome
desire and sorrow in regard to the world, then, truly, he is an island
to himself, a refuge to himself, seeking no external refuge; having
Dhamma as his island and refuge, seeking no other refuge@enddots{}

@end quotation

When we ``contemplate'' the body in the body, feeling in the feelings,
mind in the mind and mental objects in the mental objects, we will
learn not to see the self in the body, feelings, mind and mental
objects. Only if we are mindful of all the different kinds of nāma and
rūpa which present themselves in our daily life will we see that they
are impermanent, dukkha and anattā. This is the only way leading to the
end of dukkha, to the end of death. 


@node Life
@chapter Life

What is life? What is the origin of life? How and when does it end?
These are questions people keep on asking themselves. Life is nāma and
rūpa of the present moment. There is seeing now; is that not life?
Attachment, aversion and ignorance may arise on account of what is
seen; is that not life? There is thinking of what we have seen, heard,
smelt, tasted and touched; is that not life?

We have eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind; we experience
objects through these six doorways and on account of what we experience
defilements tend to arise. This is life at the present moment. But it
was also life in the past and it will be life in the future, unless
there is an end to defilements.

How did life start? Is there a beginning to our countless existences? We
cannot go back to the past. If we want to know what conditioned our
life in the past we should know what it is that conditions our life at
the present time. Is there ignorance now, when we see, hear, smell,
taste, touch or think? Is there clinging now to nāma and rūpa? So long
as we cling to visible objects, sounds, smells, flavours, to things
touched and to objects experienced through the mind-door, there are
conditions for life to go on. Life is conditioned by ignorance and
craving.

We read in the Discourse pertaining to the Great Sixfold Sense-field
(Middle Length Sayings III, no. 149) that the Buddha, while he was
staying near Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, said to the monks:

@quotation
Monks, (anyone) not knowing, not seeing eye as it really is, not
knowing, not seeing material shapes@dots{}visual consciousness@dots{}impact
on the eye as it really is, and not knowing, not seeing as it really is
the feeling, whether pleasant, painful or neither painful nor pleasant,
that arises conditioned by impact on the eye, is attached to the eye,
is attached to material shapes, is attached to visual consciousness, is
attached to impact on the eye; and as for that feeling, whether
pleasant, painful or neither painful nor pleasant, that arises
conditioned by impact on the eye @minus{}to that too is he attached. While he,
observing the satisfaction, is attached, bound and infatuated, the five
khandhas of grasping go on to future accumulation. And his craving,
which is connected with again-becoming, accompanied by attachment and
delight, finding its pleasure here and there, increases in him. And his
physical anxieties increase, and mental anxieties increase, and
physical torments increase, and mental torments increase, and physical
fevers increase, and mental fevers increase. He experiences anguish of
body and anguish of mind.

@end quotation

People wonder whether there is a first cause in the cycle of birth and
death. How and when did ignorance first arise? It is of no use to
speculate about a first cause, because this does not lead to the goal,
which is the eradication of defilements. There is ignorance now; that
is a reality. It is conditioned by past ignorance. If it is not
eradicated there will be ignorance in the future, forever. Life is like
a wheel, turning around, without any beginning.

We do not know from which plane we came, nor where we are going. Life is
so short, it is like a dream. We are born with different characters and
we have accumulated many defilements. We cannot go back to the past and
find out how we accumulated our defilements. People in the past had
defilements as well. Some of them could recollect their former lives
and see how they accumulated defilements. In the Therīgāthā (Psalms of
the Sisters, Canto XV, 72, Isidāsi) we read about the life of Isidāsi
who had one husband after another but could not please anyone of them.
However, she became a bhikkhunī (nun) and she later attained
arahatship. She was able to recollect her former lives and she knew
then why she had to endure so much sorrow: in a former life she had
committed adultery. This akusala kamma caused her to be reborn in hell
where she had to stay for many centuries and to be reborn an animal
three times. After that she was reborn as a human being three times,
but had to suffer great misery in the course of those lives, until she
attained arahatship. 

Life is birth, old age, sickness and death. The sorrow we all experience
in life is unavoidable so long as there are conditions for it. We read
in the Therīgāthā (Canto VI, 50, Paṭācārā's Five Hundred) about women
who suffered the loss of their children. They came to see Paṭācārā who
herself had lost in one day her husband, two children, parents and
brother. She was mad with grief, but was able to recover. She became a
sotāpanna, and later on she attained arahatship. She consoled the
bereaved women:@footnote{I am using the translation of the
``Therīgāthā'' by Ms. Rhys Davids: Psalms of the Early Buddhists,
P.T.S.} 

@example

The way by which men come we cannot know; 
Nor can we see the path by which they go.
Why mourn then for him who came to you,
Lamenting through your tears: ``My son! My son!''
Seeing you do not know the way he came,
Nor yet the manner of his leaving you?
Weep not, for such is here the life of man.
Unasked he came, unbidden did he go from here.
See! Ask yourself again whence came your son
To bide on earth this little breathing space?
By one way come and by another gone,
As man to die, and pass to other births @minus{}
So here and so from here @minus{}why would you weep?

@end example

We do not know from which plane of existence people have come nor where
they are going. The number of lives in the past is incalculable and
thus it is not surprising that in the course of those lives people have
been related to each other in many ways, as parents, brothers, sisters,
children. Do we want to continue in the cycle of birth and death?

 We read in the Therīgāthā (Canto VI, 55, Mahā-Pajāpatī) that
Mahā-Pajāpatī, who had made an end to defilements, spoke thus:

@example

@dots{}Now have I understood how Ill@footnote{Dukkha.} does come.
Craving, the cause, in me is dried up.
Have I not trod, have I not touched the end
Of Ill@minus{}the ariyan, the eightfold Path?
Oh! But 'tis long I've wandered down all time.
Living as mother, father, brother, son,
And as grandparent in the ages past @minus{}
Not knowing how and what things really are,
And never finding what I needed sore.
But now my eyes have seen the Exalted One;
And now I know this living frame's the last,
And shattered in the unending round of births.
No more Pajāpatī shall come to be!@dots{}

@end example

Events in our lives today have their conditions in the past. Tendencies
we have now we may have had in the past as well. Deeds we do now we may
have performed in the past too. We read in the teachings that the
Buddha said of both his own deeds and the deeds of others that similar
ones had been performed in the past. We cannot recollect our former
lives, but we know that we have accumulated defilements for countless
aeon's.

Is the word ``defilement'' not too strong an expression? We may think that
we have a pure conscience marred only by a few imperfections and weak
points. ``Defilement'' is the translation of the Pāli term ``kilesa''.
Kilesa is that which is dirty, impure. When we know our own kilesas
better we will see their loathsomeness and the sorrow they bring. We
will see their dangers, we will realize how deeply rooted they are and
how hard to eradicate. 

Our life is full of attachment, ill-will and ignorance. Not everybody
sees that there will be less sorrow when defilements are eliminated. We
each have different expectations in life. We all want happiness but
each one of us has a different idea of happiness and the ways to
achieve it. Both in the Buddha's time and today there are ``foolish
people'' and ``wise people''. Foolish people think that it is good to be
attached to people and things. They say that one is not really alive if
one has no attachment. Because of their ignorance they do not see cause
and effect in their lives. When they have pleasant experiences they do
not see that these are only moments of vipāka@footnote{Vipākacitta is
the result of kamma. Kusala kamma, good deeds, bring pleasant results
and akusala kamma, evil deeds, bring unpleasant results.} which fall
away immediately. When they experience unpleasant things they blame
others for their experience; they do not understand that the real cause
is within themselves, that the cause is the bad deeds they themselves
have performed. Those who suffer mental anxieties and depressions and
are distressed about their daily life, try to escape from it in many
different ways. Some people find satisfaction in going to the movies.
Others take alcoholic drinks or intoxicating drugs in order to live in
a different world or to feel like a different person. Those who flee
from reality will not know themselves; they will continue to live in
ignorance.

In the past and today there are people who reject the Buddha's teachings
or who misunderstand them. They do not see that life is conditioned by
ignorance and craving. They do not know the way leading to the end of
defilements. But those who see that defilements cause sorrow want to
have less defilements. They listen to the teachings and apply
themselves to dāna (generosity), to sīla (morality) and to bhāvanā
(mental development). Few people, however, are inclined to cultivate
each day of their lives the wisdom which eradicates defilements. They
are wise people. 

In the Theragāthā (Psalms of the Brethren and Sisters) we read
about men and women in the Buddha's time who had the same struggles in
life, the same anxieties and fears as people today. They had many
defilements but they were able to eradicate them by following the
eightfold Path. If they could do it, why can we not do it?

Those who are wise understand that life does not last and that it is
therefore a matter of urgency to develop the way leading to the end of
defilements. People are inclined to delay practising the Buddha's
teachings. We read in the Theragāthā (Mātanga's Son, Canto III, 174):

@example

Too cold! Too hot! Too late! Such is the cry.
And so, past men who shake off work (that waits
Their hand), the fateful moments fly,
But he who reckons cold and heat as less
Than straws, doing his duties as a man,
He no defaulter proves to happiness@enddots{}

@end example

Do we think it is too cold, too hot, too late to be mindful? We always
want to do something other than be mindful of the present moment. Is
our highest aim in life enjoyment of the things which can be
experienced through the senses? Is it wealth, physical comfort, the
company of relatives and friends? People forget that none of these
things last. They forget that as soon as we are born we are old enough
to die. Those who are wise, however, see the impermanence of all
conditioned things. In the Theragāthā (Canto II, 145) we read that
Vītasoka, when his hair was being dressed by the barber, looked into
the mirror and saw some grey hairs. He was reminded of reality and
developed insight. While he was sitting there he attained
enlightenment. We read:

@example

``Now let him shave me!'' so the barber came.
From him I took the mirror and, therein
Reflected, on myself I gazed and thought: 
``Futile for lasting is this body shown.''
(Thus thinking on the source that blinds our sight)
My spirit's darkness melted into light,
Stripped are the swathing vestments
(of defilements@footnote{Here I have added ``of defilements'', following
the Thai translation which uses the word kilesa.}) utterly.
Now is there no more coming back to be.

@end example

A look into the mirror can be most revealing! It can remind us of
impermanence. Thus we see that even when we perform the most common
activities of daily life we do not have to waste our time; mindfulness
can be developed. We may think that our daily tasks prevent us from
being mindful, but there are nāma and rūpa presenting themselves
through the six doors, no matter what we are doing. Even when one is
preparing food, insight can be developed and enlightenment can be
attained. We read in the Therīgāthā (Canto I, 1) about a woman who was
preparing food in the kitchen. A flame burnt the food. She realized at
that moment the impermanence of conditioned realities and became then
and there, in the kitchen, a non-returner, anāgāmī@footnote{A person
who has realized the third stage of enlightenment.}. She entered the
order of bhikkhunī's and attained arahatship later on. She declared her
attainment with the following verse:

@example

Sleep softly, little Sturdy, take your rest
At ease, wrapped in the robe you yourself have made.
Stilled are the passions that would rage within,
Withered as potherbs in the oven dried.

@end example

We may think that we cannot be mindful because we are too restless and
agitated. It is encouraging for us to read that people in the Buddha's
time who were also oppressed by their many defilements and who suffered
from their obsessions, could nevertheless attain enlightenment. In the
Therīgāthā (Canto V, 38, ``An Anonymous Sister) we read about a nun who
was troubled by sense desires and could not find peace of mind. She was
taught Dhamma by Dhammadinnā and she attained the ``six supernormal
powers'', the sixth of which is the destruction of all
defilements@footnote{The five ``mundane'' powers or knowledges are:
magical powers, divine ear, by which one hears sounds heavenly and
human, far and near,  penetration of the minds of others, divine eye,
by which one sees the passing away and rebirth of beings, and
remembrance of former lives. }. The text states:

@example

For five-and twenty years since I came forth.
Not for one moment could my heart attain
The blessedness of calm serenity.
No peace of mind I found. My every thought
Was soaked with the passion of sense desires.
With outstretched arms and shedding futile tears
I went, a wretched woman, to my cell.
Then She to this poor bhikkhunī drew near,
Who was my foster-mother in the faith.
She taught me the Dhamma, wherein I learnt
The factors, organs, bases of this self, 
Impermanent compound. Hearing her words,
Beside her I sat down to meditate.
And now I know the days of the long past,
And clearly shines the Eye Celestial,
I know the thoughts of other minds, and hear
With sublimated sense the sound of things
Ineffable. The mystic potencies
I exercise; and all the deadly Drug
That poisoned every thought are purged away.
A living truth for me this ``Sixfold Knowledge'',
Accomplished is the Buddha's Dhamma.

@end example

Those who are oppressed by their anxieties to such an extent that they
want to flee from reality may even think of committing suicide. In the
Buddha's time people were no different from people today. But even for
those who have lost all hope there is a way by which they can be freed
from despair, liberated from sorrow and fear. We read in the Therīgāthā
(Canto V, 40, Sīhā) about a nun who was on the point of committing
suicide. But at that moment her knowledge reached maturity and she
became an arahat. The text states:

@example

Distracted, harassed by desires of sense,
Unmindful of the ``What'' and ``Why'' of things,
Stung and inflated by the memories
Of former days, over which I lacked control @minus{}
Corrupting canker spreading over my heart @minus{}
I followed heedless dreams of happiness,
And got no steadiness of mind,
All given over to dalliance with sense,
So did I fare for seven weary years,
In lean and sallow misery of unrest.
I, wretched, found no ease by day or night,
So took a rope and plunged into the wood:
``Better for me a friendly gallows-tree
Than indulging in a worldly life.''
Strong was the noose I made; and on a bough
I bound the rope and flung it round my neck,
When see!@dots{}my heart was set at liberty!

@end example

When we read about men and women in the Buddha's time we recognize
ourselves and other people who are living today. We all have
accumulated lobha, dosa and moha. We all are hindered by our many
defilements. We sometimes wonder whether we will ever reach the goal.
Nibbāna seems to be far away. But in fact, with every moment of right
mindfulness of nāma or rūpa right understanding can develop, and thus
wrong view can be eliminated and eventually enlightenment be attained.
We read in the Theragāthā (Canto XVI, 252, Mālunkyā's Son) about the
son of Mālunkyā who listened to the Buddha and later attained
arahatship. The text states:

@example

Sight of fair shape bewildering mindfulness, 
If one but heed the image sweet and dear, 
The heart inflamed in feeling does overflow, 
And clinging stays. Thus in him do grow
Divers emotions rooted in the sight. 
Greed and aversion and the heart of him 
Does suffer grievously. Of him, thus heaping 
Store of pain and suffering, the Buddha@footnote{The English text has here: ``we say'', but
follow the Thai translation: ``The Buddha said''.}said: 
Far from nibbāna!

@end example

(The same is said about the impressions through the other senses.)

@example

He who for things he sees, no passion breeds,
But mindful, clear of head, can suffer sense
With uninflamed heart, no clinging stays;
And as he sees, so normally he feels;
For him no heaping up, but diminishing;
So does he heedfully pursue his way.
Of him, building no store of ill, the Buddha said:
Near is nibbāna!

@end example
The Buddha's teachings can change people's character if they walk the
way he taught. We read in the Theragāthā (Canto II, 139, Nanda) about
Nanda, who had attained arahatship. He said:

@example

Heedless and shallow once my thoughts were set
On all the bravery of outward show;
Fickle was I and frivolous; all my days
Were worn with wanton sensuality.
But by the Buddha's skillful art benign,
Who of sun's lineage comes, was I brought
To live by deeper thought, whereby my heart
From (the great swamp of endless) life I drew.

@end example

People in the Buddha's time understood how mindfulness should be
developed every day of their lives. We read in the ``Papa–casādanī'', the
commentary to the Middle Length Sayings, in the section about the
Satipaṭṭhāna sutta (Middle Length Sayings I, 10) that the Buddha taught
the ``Four Applications of Mindfulness''@footnote{The ``Four Applications
of mindfulness'' are: Mindfulness of the Body, of Feelings, of Cittas
and of Dhammas. All nāmas and rūpas which are objects of mindfulness
are included in these four ``applications''.} to the people of Kuru (in
the District of Delhi). In Kuru all classes of people would develop
mindfulness, even the slave-labourers. Those who did not develop
mindfulness were considered as dead people. If we do not develop right
understanding we are like dead people because we have to continue in
the cycle of birth and death. 

Those who are ignorant of Dhamma and those who are wise have different
aims in life and they also have different views of the future. Some
people think of a happy rebirth as the fulfilment of all their
expectations in life. They hope for life to continue in heaven where
there is bliss forever. Others may not think of an after-life, but they
dream of an ideal world in the future, a world without wars, without
discord among men. But they do not know how such a world could come
into being.

Those who have right understanding of Dhamma know that what we call
``world'' is impermanent. This world arose by conditions and it will pass
away again. World systems arise and dissolve. When it is the
appropriate time a person is born who will be a Buddha who teaches the
truth. But even the teachings do not stay; they are misinterpreted and
corrupted because of people's defilements. People today still have the
opportunity to hear Dhamma and develop the eightfold Path. Those who
are wise do not dream of an ideal world in the future. They know that
the most beneficial thing one can do both for oneself and for others is
to eliminate defilements right at the present moment. The Buddha taught
mental development to those who want to eliminate defilements. People
have different accumulations. Some develop samatha (tranquil
meditation), others vipassanā (insight, right understanding of
realities); others again develop both samatha and vipassanā. Those who
develop vipassanā will know what the world really is; they will know
that there are ``six worlds'': the world of visible object, of sound, of
odour, of flavour, of tangible objects and of mental objects. They will
know that these worlds are impermanent. The Buddha knew with clear
vision all worlds in all ways and under every aspect; he is called
``Knower of the Worlds'' (lokavidā)@footnote{See Visuddhimagga VII,
36-46.}.

Those who still have craving cannot see that the end of rebirth is the
end of dukkha. Those who see the impermanence of all conditioned things
can eliminate craving stage by stage. The arahat does not cling to life
any more. For him there will be an end to life, that is: an end to nāma
and rūpa, never to arise again, an end to birth, old age, sickness and
death. The arahat realizes that the end to birth is true happiness,
true peace. In the Theragāthā (Canto XVI, 248) we read that the arahat
Adhimutta was assailed by robbers who were amazed by his calmness.
Adhimutta said:

@example

@dots{}He who has passed beyond, from grasping free, 
Whose task is done, sane and immune, is glad,
Not sorry, when the term of lives is reached,
As one who from the slaughter-house escapes.
He who the ideal order has attained,
All the world over seeking nought to own,
As one who from a burning house escapes,
When death is drawing near he grieves not@enddots{}

@end example
Ignorance and clinging condition our life. When ignorance and clinging
are eradicated there are no more conditions for rebirth. The end of
birth is the end of dukkha. As we have read in the above-quoted
Discourse on the Great Sixfold Sense-field (Middle Length Sayings III,
no 149), the Buddha said about the person who does not see things as
they are, that he experiences ``anguish of body and anguish of mind''. He
said about the person who sees things as they are:

@quotation
But (anyone), monks, knowing and seeing eye as it really is, knowing and
seeing material shapes@enddots{} visual consciousness@enddots{} impact on the eye as
it really is, and knowing, seeing as it really is the feeling, whether
pleasant, painful or neither painful nor pleasant, that arises
conditioned by impact on the eye, is not attached to the eye nor to
material shapes nor to visual consciousness nor to impact on the eye;
and that feeling, whether pleasant or painful or neither painful nor
pleasant, that arises conditioned by impact on the eye @minus{}neither to that
is he attached. While he, observing the peril, is not attached, bound
or infatuated, the five khandhas of grasping go on to future
diminution. And his craving which is connected with again-becoming,
accompanied by attachment and delight, finding its pleasure here and
there, decreases in him. And his physical anxieties decrease, and
mental anxieties decrease, and bodily torments@enddots{} and mental
torments@enddots{} and bodily fevers decrease, and mental fevers decrease. He
experiences happiness of body and happiness of mind.
@end quotation

@node The Development of Calm
@chapter The Development of Calm

@example
If there be none in front, nor none behind
Be found, is one alone and in the woods
Exceeding pleasant does his life become.
Come then! alone I'll get me hence and go
To lead the forest-life the Buddha praised,
And taste the welfare which the brother knows,
Who dwells alone with concentrated mind@enddots{}

@end example

Those were the words of a prince who longed to live in the forest
(Theragāthā, Canto X, 234, Ekavihāriya). Do we not all have moments
when we wish to have none in front and none behind us, moments when we
wish to dwell alone? It seems impossible to find tranquillity in daily
life. We have people around us the whole day, and there is noise
everywhere. The real cause of our restlessness, however, is not outside
but inside ourselves; the real cause is our defilements. We may not
commit grave crimes such as killing or stealing, but we think
unwholesome thoughts and we spend much time in talking about other
people's mistakes and shortcomings. We harm ourselves in that way.
Unwholesomeness is harmful, to both body and mind. We can see the
difference in appearance between a restless person and someone who is
serene and full of loving-kindness.

It is not easy to change our habits. If we are used to speaking in an
unwholesome way then we cannot expect to change ourselves at once. For
how long have we been accumulating unwholesomeness? Because of our
accumulated unwholesome tendencies we are hindered in doing good deeds,
speaking in a wholesome way and having wholesome thoughts, and we are
restless and agitated. We would like to have peace of mind but we do
not know where to find it.

Dāna (generosity), sīla (morality) and bhāvanā (mental development) are
ways of having kusala cittas instead of akusala cittas. The Buddha
encouraged people to develop all kinds of wholesomeness, be it dāna,
sīla or bhāvanā. At the moment of kusala citta there are no lobha, dosa
and moha and there is calm. When we offer food to the monks and pay
respect to them there is calm. There is not always opportunity for dāna
or sīla but there is at any time opportunity for the way of kusala
which is mental development, bhāvanā, and this includes: the study and
the teaching of Dhamma, samatha (development of calm) and vipassanā.
Dāna and sīla can be performed with paññā or without it, but for mental
development paññā is indispensable.

As regards the form of bhāvanā which is the study of Dhamma, we will
have more understanding of the teachings through reading the Tipiṭaka,
the Three Collections of the Vinaya, the Suttanta and the Abhidhamma.
If we study the Dhamma, ponder over it and also explain it to others,
there are conditions for kusala cittas with paññā . Both our own life
and the lives of others will be enriched. The study of the Dhamma will
help us to have right understanding of our life. 

Samatha, the development of calm, and vipassanā, the development of
insight, are included in bhāvanā, but they each have a different aim
and a different way of development. The aim of samatha is calm. In
samatha defilements are temporarily subdued, but they are not
eradicated. The aim of vipassanā is seeing things as they are. The
right understanding, paññā , which is developed in vipassanā can
eradicate defilements. 

Through samatha one develops the calm which is temporary freedom from
lobha, attachment, dosa, aversion, and moha, ignorance. When we realize
how often in a day there are akusala cittas, we would like to develop
more wholesome thoughts. Samatha is a way of developing kusala cittas,
also at the moments when there is no opportunity for dāna or sīla.
Samatha is a means of developing a higher degree of calm, but one must
have right understanding of the way of its development and one must
know the characteristic of calm which is wholesome. Some people may
think that there is calm when they are alone in the woods, but is that
always the calm which is wholesome? Instead of kusala cittas there may
be attachment, aversion and ignorance. Thus, in order to develop
samatha one must have a very precise knowledge of the different cittas
which arise, otherwise one is likely to take for calm what is in fact
akusala citta.

For the development of samatha there are specific meditation subjects
(kammaṭṭhāna), forty in all@footnote{For details see: Visuddhimagga,
Ch IV-IX.}. It depends on the individual which subject conditions
calm for him. If one would try to use, instead of one or more among
these forty meditation subjects, any other object, it would not help
one to attain true calm. 

Right understanding of the characteristic of calm and of the meditation
subject is the most important factor for the development of samatha.
One may think that samatha is a matter of just concentrating on one
object, but which type of citta arises while one tries to concentrate?
Are we attached to an idea of ``my concentration''? When the citta is
akusala citta there is no mental development. Thus, it is essential to
know when the citta is kusala citta and when it is not.

What is concentration? Concentration or one-pointedness, in Pāli
``ekaggatā cetasika'' or ``samādhi'', is a mental factor,
cetasika@footnote{Cetasika is a mental factor accompanying citta.
There is only one citta at a time, but each citta is accompanied by
several cetasikas which each perform their own function. Some cetasikas
accompany each citta, others do not. There are akusala cetasikas which
accompany only akusala citta, and there are ``sobhana cetasikas''
(beautiful cetasikas) which accompany only sobhana citta. }, which
accompanies each citta. Its function is to focus on one object. For
example, seeing is a citta which experiences visible object.
One-pointedness or ekaggatā cetasika, which accompanies the citta, is
focusing on only that object. Each citta can have only one object at a
time and ekaggatā cetasika focuses on that object. No matter whether
there is seeing, hearing, a citta with attachment, aversion, generosity
or wisdom, there is ekaggatā cetasika accompanying these different
moments. The quality of ekaggatā cetasika depends on the citta it
accompanies. When ekaggatā cetasika accompanies akusala citta it is
also akusala, and when it accompanies kusala citta it is also kusala.

As regards right concentration in samatha, this can arise only if there
is right understanding of the development of calm. When there is calm
there is at the same time right concentration as well which accompanies
the kusala citta.

Can samatha be developed in daily life or do we have to lead a secluded
life? If one intends to develop higher degrees of calm, there are
specific conditions which have to be fulfilled, as we will see.
However, not everybody is able to or intends to develop higher degrees
of calm. If we have right understanding of samatha, there can also be
conditions for moments of calm in daily life. We can, in daily life,
reflect for example on the loathsomeness of the body or on corpses,
which are among the forty meditation subjects which can condition calm.
For some people the meditations on a corpse can be helpful to have less
attachment to sense-impressions. We all have to see dead people or dead
animals at times. When we have read about the meditations on corpses
and pondered over them there is a condition for the arising of
wholesome thoughts at such moments, instead of akusala cittas with
aversion. We may remember what the Buddha said about the impermanence
of all conditioned things.

We read in the Thera-Therīgāthā (Psalms of the Brethren, Psalms of the
Sisters) about people who were restless, who could not find peace of
mind. Meditations on corpses and the foulness of the body reminded them
of the truth of impermanence. In the Theragāthā (Canto VI, 213, Kulla)
we read about the monk Kulla who had been infatuated with sense
pleasures. The Buddha recommended him to meditate in the charnel field.
The meditation on the putrefaction of the body was the condition for
him to attain calm to the degree of the first stage of jhāna,
absorption. On that basis he developed insight and attained arahatship.
The following verses are an expression of his attainment: 

@example

Kulla had gone to where the dead lie still
And there he saw a woman's body cast,
Untended in the field, the food of worms.
``Behold the foul compound, Kulla, diseased,
Impure, dripping, exuding, pride of fools.''
Grasping the mirror of the holy Norm@footnote{The Dhamma.},
To win the vision by its lore revealed,
I saw reflected there, without, within,
The nature of this empty, fleeting frame,
As is this body, so that one was once.
And as that body, so will this one be@enddots{}

@end example

Kulla was reminded of the truth and saw things as they are.

There are people for whom the meditation on corpses or on the
loathsomeness of the body is not helpful; they may instead be inclined
to the recollections of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, which
are also included among the forty meditation subjects. Or they may
recollect ``virtue'' (sīla) or ``generosity'' (dāna), which are other
meditation subjects. The recollection of generosity may encourage us to
more generosity. In the Visuddhimagga (VII, 107) we read that the
person who starts to develop this recollection should make the
following resolution: ``From now on, when there is anyone present to
receive, I shall not eat even a single mouthful without having given a
gift.'' After he has given a gift he can recollect the following: ``It is
gain for me, it is great gain for me, that in a generation obsessed by
the stain of avarice I abide with my heart free from stain of avarice,
and am freely generous and openhanded, that I delight in relinquishing,
expect to be asked, and rejoice in giving and sharing.'' For this
recollection one must know the characteristic of generosity; one cannot
recollect generosity and one cannot become calm with this meditation
subject if one is not generous in one's daily life.

There are meditations which are the ``divine abidings'' (Brahmavihāras).
They are: loving-kindness (mettā), compassion (karuṇā),
sympathetic joy (muditā) and equanimity (upekkhā). However, these
qualities cannot be one's meditation subjects if one does not practise
them in daily life. How could one develop the meditation subject of
loving-kindness if one does not know the characteristic of
loving-kindness as it appears in daily life? We may have moments of
pure loving-kindness but there are bound to be many moments of selfish
affection in between. Are we not attached to people? It is necessary to
know exactly when there is a moment of pure loving-kindness and when
there is attachment. There must be right understanding which clearly
distinguishes between these characteristics and thus we see again that
right understanding is indispensable for samatha. 

If one knows the characteristic of loving-kindness one can develop it
and then it can condition calm. This subject can help us to have kusala
citta instead of thoughts of ill-will. 

Mindfulness of breathing is another meditation subject. In order to
develop calm with this subject one must have right understanding of it
and know how to be mindful of the characteristic of breath. According
to the Visuddhimagga mindfulness of breathing is one of the most
difficult meditation subjects and, since breath is very subtle, not
everyone is able to be mindful of it. 

What is breath? What we call breath is rūpa, a physical phenomenon.
Rūpas of the body can be conditioned by one of the four following
factors: by kamma, by citta, by temperature or by food. Breath is
conditioned by citta. So long as there is citta there is breath
conditioned by citta. We all cling to our life and all the things we
enjoy in life, but life is very fragile. Life is supported by breath,
rūpa which arises and then falls away. When we have drawn our last
breath, death occurs and of what use are then our possessions and all
the things to which we cling so much? When mindfulness of breath is
developed with right understanding it can condition the calm which is
temporary freedom from defilements. However, the characteristic of
breath must be known correctly.

The Visuddhimagga (VIII, 197, f.f.) explains that breath appears where
it touches the nose tip or upper lip. It falls away immediately at the
place where it appears. One should not follow the going out and coming
in of breath, one should only be aware of breath where it touches the
nose tip or upper lip. The Visuddhimagga explains this by way of
similes, one of which is the simile of a gate-keeper:
@quotation
This is the simile of the gate-keeper: just as a gate-keeper does not
examine people inside and outside the town, asking, ``Who are you? Where
have you come from? Where are you going? What have you got in your
hand?'' for those people are not his concern @minus{}but does examine each man
as he arrives at the gate, so too, the incoming breaths that have gone
inside and the outgoing breaths that have gone outside are not this
bhikkhu's concern, but they are his concern each time they arrive at
the (nostril) gate itself.
@end quotation
If one follows the going out and the coming in of breath one's mind
will, according to the Visuddhimagga (VIII, 197) be ``distracted by
disquiet and perturbation''. Right understanding of the method of
development of this subject is indispensable. If one thinks that all
that is necessary is just trying very hard to concentrate on breath one
may concentrate with lobha, dosa and moha. If one enjoys watching one's
breath and if one aims at feeling relaxed there is attachment and this
is not bhāvanā. Some people may be inclined to do breathing exercises
for their health, but, if one wants to develop calm one must know what
is bhāvanā and what is not bhāvanā. The aim of this meditation subject
is calm which is wholesome and thus there must be paññā which knows
exactly when the citta is kusala citta and when it is akusala citta.
When there are moments of calm there is no clinging. 

It is extremely difficult to be mindful of breath in the right way so
that there can be true calm, freedom from lobha, dosa and moha. It may
happen that one takes for breath what is not breath, the rūpa
conditioned by citta. Some people follow the movement of the abdomen
and they erroneously take this for mindfulness of breath. If one has no
accumulations for mindfulness of breath, one should not force oneself
to take up this subject. There are many other subjects of meditation
which can condition calm. 

There can be mindfulness of breath both in samatha and in vipassanā.
What is the difference between the object of mindfulness in samatha and
the object of mindfulness in vipassanā? In samatha there is sati which
is mindful, non-forgetful, of breath in order to temporarily subdue
defilements. In samatha the object of mindfulness is not, as is the
case in vipassanā, the characteristic of whatever nāma or rūpa appears
at the present moment through one of the six doors. There is paññā in
both samatha and vipassanā, but the paññā in samatha does not know nāma
and rūpa as they are, as non-self (anattā). The paññā in samatha knows
when the citta is kusala citta and when it is akusala citta; it knows
how to develop the calm which is temporary freedom from defilements.
The aim of vipassanā is seeing things as they are. In vipassanā right
understanding is developed of all nāmas and rūpa which appear, no
matter what one's activities are. Also when one develops calm by means
of mindfulness of breathing there are nāmas and rūpas which appear and
these can be known as they really are: as impermanent and non-self. The
paññā of vipassanā knows nāma and rūpa as they are.

Several of the meditation subjects of samatha can be our recollections
in daily life and they can condition moments of calm. Some people,
however, may have accumulations to develop higher degrees of calm, even
to the stage of jhāna, absorption. When there is a higher degree of
calm ekaggatā cetasika or samādhi (concentration) which accompanies the
citta with calm is of a higher degree as well. Samādhi develops when
there are the right conditions, one cannot force oneself to become
concentrated.

In the development of samatha there are three stages of samādi: the
preliminary stage or parikamma samādhi, access concentration or upacāra
samādhi and attainment concentration or appanā samādi, which
accompanies jhānacitta. When there is still the preliminary stage of
samādhi, parikamma samādhi, the citta is aware of the meditation
subject, but it is not jhānacitta; it is citta of the sensuous plane of
consciousness, kāmāvacara citta. Kāmāvacara cittas are the cittas which
arise in daily life when, for example, we see, think or wish for
something. When samādhi has reached the stage of access concentration,
upacāra samādhi, there is a higher degree of calm but at that stage the
citta is still kāmāvacara citta, not jhānacitta. When samādhi has
reached the stage of attainment concentration, appanā samādhi, the
citta is jhānacitta. The jhāna­citta experiences the meditation subject
with absorption; at that moment one is free from sense-impressions and
thus also from the defilements which are bound up with them. The
jhānacitta is of a higher level of consciousness than kāmāvacara citta.

If people do not know about the different stages of samādhi they may
erroneously think that they have jhānacittas or they may doubt whether
they have attained jhāna or not. The jhānacitta is accompanied by
paññā . If one has doubts it is clear that there is no paññā . Even if
one has no intention to cultivate jhāna it is useful to know about the
different degrees of samādhi. One might have cultivated jhāna in a past
life and if there are the right conditions, one of the degrees of
samādhi could arise. People who have not studied Dhamma may have
confused ideas about concentration and about jhāna. There is right
concentration and wrong concentration. When people concentrate on a
meditation subject in the wrong way, for example with lobha, there is
wrong concentration. They may, because of wrong concentration, have
unusual experiences which they take for jhāna. Or they may even take
such experiences for the attainment of nibbāna. 

There are several stages of jhāna and each higher stage is more subtle
and more refined than the preceding one. There is rūpa-jhāna, which is
translated as ``fine-material jhāna'', and arūpa-jhāna, which is
translated as ``immaterial jhāna''. Arūpa-jhāna is more subtle than
rūpa-jhāna; the meditation subjects of arūpa-jhānacitta do not pertain
to objects which can be experienced through the senses. 

Of the forty meditation subjects, some can lead only to access
concentration, upacāra samādhi, some to rūpa-jhāna but not to the
highest stage, and some lead to the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna. There
are four (or, for some people five) stages of rūpa-jhāna@footnote{For
the attainment of jhāna one has to develop jhāna-factors, specific
cetasikas. At each higher stage of rūpa-jhāna jhāna-factors are
abandoned, they are no longer needed. Some people can at the second
stage abandon two factors instead of one factor and thus for them there
are four stages of jhāna instead of five stages.} Those who see the
disadvantages of the meditation subjects of rūpa-jhāna, which are less
refined than those of arūpa-jhāna, develop the meditation subjects of
arūpa-jhāna. There are four stages of arūpa-jhāna, which are: the
sphere of boundless space, the sphere of boundless consciousness, the
sphere of nothingness and the sphere of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. Perception in the fourth
arūpa-jhāna is very subtle. 

Of those who develop samatha only very few can attain jhāna. Much skill
has to be developed in order to attain jhāna. One should know the
conditions for the attainment of jhāna and what can obstruct its
attainment. We read in the Visuddhimagga (XII, 8) how difficult it is
to attain the preliminary stage of samādhi, parikamma samādhi, or
access concentration, upacāra samādhi, to attain jhāna and to develop
the skills in jhāna in order to acquire supernatural powers. 

People today want to experience something which is beyond this world
because they feel distressed about life or they are bored. Wouldn't we
sometimes like to know the future? We may be curious as to what
fortune-tellers can predict about our life. Many of us read the
horoscope in the daily newspaper, and even when we say that we do not
believe in those things we cannot help attaching some importance to
them. Sick people who cannot be cured by a doctor go to healers who
claim that they can treat diseases in a more effective way than
doctors. We may well go to fortune-tellers, or to people who claim to
have clairvoyance, but we still do not know ourselves. We still have
defilements, we still have ignorance, we still have to continue in the
cycle of birth and death. So long as there are attachment, ill-will and
ignorance in one's heart, true happiness cannot be found.

In the Buddha's time people developed jhāna until they became quite
skillful and they even acquired supernatural powers. Those who have
attained the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna and of arūpa-jhāna and have
acquired ``mastery'' in the attainment of the these stages, can apply
themselves to the development of supernatural powers. The development
of those powers is extremely difficult; only very few of those who
attain jhāna can develop them. The supernatural powers developed by
means of samatha are: miraculous powers such as flying through the air,
walking on water, diving into the earth; the ``Celestial Ear'' or
clairaudiance; the power to discern the thoughts of others; the power
of recollecting one's past lives; the ``Celestial Eye'' (clairvoyance), by
means of which one also sees the passing away and rebirth of beings.

We read in the Discourse on the Fruits of the Life of a Recluse
(Dialogues of the Buddha I, no. 2, 77, 78) that the Buddha spoke to the
King of Magadha about the recluse who had supernatural powers. The
Buddha said to the King:

With his heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, cultured, devoid of
evil, supple, ready to act, firm and imperturbable, he applies and
bends down his mind to the modes of the Wondrous Gift. He enjoys the
Wondrous Gift in its various modes @minus{}being one he becomes many, or having
become many he becomes one again; he becomes visible or invisible; he
goes, feeling no obstruction, to the further side of a wall or rampart
or hill, as if through air; he penetrates up and down through solid
ground, as if through water; he walks on water without breaking
through, as if on solid ground; he travels cross-legged in the sky, like
birds on wing; even the Moon and the Sun, so powerful, so mighty though
they be, does he touch and feel with his hand; he reaches in the body
even up to the heaven of Brahmā@enddots{}

In Buddhism one learns to study cause and effect. People are impressed
by extraordinary things when they do not know the conditions that give
rise to them. Each phenomenon in our life has conditions through which
it arises. When we know this we are not surprised by strange phenomena.
Moggallāna, Anuruddha and other disciples has supernatural powers, but
they did not cling to them or take them for self because they realized
that those phenomena arose because of conditions.

Samatha is a high degree of kusala kamma and it brings about kusala
vipāka. Samatha can help people to be more calm. But defilements cannot
be eradicated by samatha, even if calm is developed to the degree of
jhāna. Nor can defilements be eradicated by supernatural powers. Jhāna
and supernatural powers do not lead to the end of ignorance. The
Buddha, when he was still a Bodhisatta, developed samatha, but he also
developed vipassanā in order to become the Fully Enlightened One, the
Buddha. 

In the Vinaya (Book of the Discipline I, Pārājika, Defeat I, 1, 4) we
read that the Buddha spoke to the brahmin of Veraja about the ``three
watches'' of the night in which he attained enlightenment. In the first
watch he recollected, by means of supernatural powers developed through
samatha, his former lives. In the second watch he saw, by means of
supernatural powers, the passing away and rebirth of beings. In the
third watch his defilements were eradicated and he attained Buddhahood.
We read:
@quotation
Then with mind collected@dots{}I directed the mind towards the knowledge of
the destruction of the cankers. I knew as it really is: This is dukkha,
this is the arising of dukkha, this is the stopping of dukkha, this is
the course leading to the stopping of dukkha@dots{}In me, thus knowing,
thus seeing, my mind was freed from the canker of sensual pleasures, my
mind was freed from the canker of becoming, my mind was freed from the
canker of false views, my mind was freed from the canker of ignorance.
(To me) freed, came knowledge through the freedom; I knew: Destroyed is
rebirth, lived is the Brahma-life, done is what was to be done, there
is no beyond for this state of things. This was, brahmin, the third
knowledge attained by me in the third watch of the night. Ignorance was
dispelled, knowledge arose, darkness was dispelled, light arose@enddots{}

@end quotation

The four ariyan truths can be known through vipassanā. How could one
know that nāma and rūpa are dukkha unless one is mindful of their
characteristics when they appear at the present moment? Only thus will
we know that they are impermanent and dukkha, unsatisfactory. This kind
of knowledge leads to the eradication of defilements. 

@node Vipassanā
@chapter Vipassanā

@emph{Questioner:} In the development of vipassanā, insight, we learn to see
things as they are. Seeing things as they are means: seeing nāma and
rūpa as they are. Thus, we should distinguish nāma and rūpa from each
other more clearly.Rūpa is that which does not experience anything.
Can we say that nāma is that which experiences and rūpa is that which
is experienced?

@emph{Nina:} You say that rūpa is that which is experienced. Your words imply
that nāma cannot be experienced. Nāma experiences not only rūpa but it
experiences nāma as well. Can you not notice it when there is a happy
feeling, when there is aversion, when there is thinking? It is not
``self'' who notices this, but nāma. Nāma knows nāma at those moments.

@emph{Question:} In vipassanā we develop awareness. Awareness is always
awareness of something. I am not sure that I understand what awareness
is.

@emph{Nina:} The Pāli term ``sati'' is translated into English as ``mindfulness''
or ``awareness''. These words might create confusion. When we say in
conventional language that we are aware of something it might mean that
we know or experience something, but this does not necessarily mean
that there is sati. It is, however, not important which word we use to
name the reality which is sati, but it is essential to understand its
characteristic. 

Sati is a ``beautiful'' mental factor, sobhana cetasika, which arises only
with sobhana cittas@footnote{Sobhana cittas include not only kusala
cittas but also kusala vipākacittas and kiriyacittas (inoperative
cittas) of the arahat, accompanied by sobhana hetus, beautiful roots. 
}. Each kusala citta is accompanied by sati which is non-forgetful,
heedful, of what is wholesome and prevents one from unwholesomeness.
There are many degrees and levels of sati. There is sati with dāna,
generosity. When we are generous it is sati which is non-forgetful of
generosity. There is sati with sīla, morality. When we abstain from
killing it is sati which is heedful, which prevents us from killing.
There is sati in samatha, the development of calm. When we for example
ponder over the virtues of the Buddha there are moments of calm; it is
sati which is mindful of the object which conditions calm. When we
develop vipassanā there is sati accompanying the kusala citta, and it
is mindful of whatever nāma or rūpa appears now, at this moment,
through one of the six doors. Through mindfulness of nāma and rūpa we
will learn to see things as they really are. Thus, no matter whether we
perform dāna, observe sīla, develop samatha or vipassanā, there is sati
with the kusala citta, but the quality of sati is different at these
different moments. 

@emph{Question:} How do I know when there is sati of vipassanā?

@emph{Nina:} In order to know when there is sati of vipassanā we should
understand what the object of sati is: a reality, a nāma or rūpa which
appears now. Nāmas and rūpas appear one at a time through the six
doors. They are realities which can be directly experienced. We are
ignorant of realities and we do not know the difference between
realities and concepts or ideas. We can think of concepts and ideas but
they are not realities which can be directly experienced through one of
the six doors. We believe that there are people and things which stay
and we do not see that what we take for permanent or self are in
reality only different phenomena which are impermanent and not self.

We cling to the concept of a person or thing which exists, but what is
there in reality? What can be directly experienced through one of the
six doors? Not a person, not a thing which exists, only different
elements which present themselves one at a time through eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, bodysense or mind, through these six doorways. 

When we, for example, take a loaf of bread, there is usually no
development of insight, but we cling to the concept of a bread which
stays, at least for some time. Bread is a concept or idea, it is not a
reality which can be directly experienced. What are the realities which
can be directly experienced? Through the eyes that which is visible,
visible object, can be experienced. We do not see a loaf of bread, but
we can think of bread because of remembrance of past experiences. The
seeing of visible object conditions the thinking of the concept of
bread. Through the eyes appears only visible object. Seeing sees
visible object. Visible object and seeing are realities which can be
known by paññā , right understanding. When we touch the loaf of bread,
tangible object can be experienced through the bodysense, namely:
hardness, softness, heat, cold, motion or pressure. These are
realities, rūpas, which can be known by paññā . The nāma which
experiences these rūpas is also real and it can be known by paññā .
Through the nose odour can be experienced. The rūpa which is odour and
the nāma which experiences odour are realities which can be known by
paññā . Through the tongue flavour can be experienced. The rūpa which is
flavour and the nāma which experiences flavour are realities which can
be known. Thus we see that there are many different nāmas and rūpas
which can be known one at a time. We still think: ``I see, I hear, I
experience'', but through the development of insight we will learn that
there are only nāma and rūpa, no self. The nāma which is seeing sees,
not self. Seeing arises because of conditions and falls away
immediately, although we do not realize this. The nāma which is hearing
hears, not self. There are many different types of nāmas which
experience different objects.

One nāma or rūpa at a time can be object of mindfulness, not concepts or
ideas such as a person, a cup or a loaf of bread. We use names in daily
life which denote concepts and ideas, but we must know the difference
between concepts and ideas and characteristics of nāma and rūpa which
can be directly experienced without the need to name them. Nāma and
rūpa are ultimate or absolute realities (paramattha dhammas) which each
have their own characteristic. Seeing, for example has its own
characteristic; we can use different names in different languages to
denote seeing, but its characteristic is unchangeable. Seeing is always
seeing, no matter how we name it; it is a nāma which experiences
visible object and it can be known when it appears. Is there no seeing
now? Hardness is always hardness, no matter how we name it; it is a
rūpa which can be experienced through the bodysense. Is there no
hardness now? Thus, we can use different names for a nāma or a rūpa,
but their characteristics cannot be changed. When they appear through
one of the six doors they can be directly experienced. We can think of
concepts and ideas, but they are not ultimate realities. When we think
of them the thinking itself is a reality which arises, a type of nāma;
it arises because of conditions. 

Sati in vipassanā is mindful, non-forgetful, of ultimate realities, of
the nāmas and rūpas which appear. It is completely different from what
we mean by ``mindfulness'' or ``awareness'' in conventional language. Every
citta experiences an object, it is ``aware'' or conscious of an object,
but not every citta is accompanied by sati. Hardness, for example, can
be experienced by different types of citta, but there is not sati with
every type of citta. When there is sati which is mindful of the
characteristic of hardness, only that characteristic appears and there
is at that moment no thought of a thing which is hard or of a hand
which touches something hard. A thing which is hard or a hand which
touches something hard are concepts we may think of, but at such
moments there is no mindfulness of the characteristic of hardness. At
the moment sati is mindful of hardness which appears, paññā can
investigate that characteristic in order to know it as it is: only a
rūpa, not a thing which stays, not a ``self''. 

In the beginning there cannot yet be a clear understanding of nāma and
rūpa, but through mindfulness of the characteristics of nāma and rūpa
which appear one at a time, paññā can gradually develop. 

It is important to know the difference between the moments when there is
sati and those when there is no sati. There is often forgetfulness of
realities, but sometimes sati can arise. We will learn the difference
from experience. After there has been forgetfulness of realities for a
long time sati may arise which is mindful of one characteristic of nāma
or rūpa at a time. It is not self who is mindful, it is sati. We cannot
force sati to arise because it is a type of nāma and not self. It can
arise only when there are conditions for its arising.

@emph{Question:} We cannot be aware of nāma and rūpa at the same time, but I
would like to know how nāma and rūpa are related to each other. When
there is hearing there is also sound which is rūpa. When there is
seeing there is also visible object which is rūpa. 

@emph{Nina:} Do you want to have theoretical knowledge of all nāmas and rūpas
or do you want to develop the wisdom which knows from direct experience
the characteristics of the phenomena appearing through the five senses
and through the mind-door? There are different levels of wisdom and we
should find out what kind of wisdom we are developing.

There are several kinds of rūpa, some of which are conditioned by kamma,
some by citta, some by temperature and some by nutrition. There are
many kinds of nāma. Nāma can condition rūpa and rūpa can condition nāma
in many different ways.

@emph{Question:} Why do you use the word ``condition''? Is condition the same as
cause?

@emph{Nina:} When we speak about cause we usually think of one cause which
brings about one effect. There are, however, different kinds of
conditions for each nāma and for each rūpa. For example, when there is
seeing, the rūpa which is visible object conditions the seeing by way
of object. But seeing does not only have visible object as its
condition. Eye-sense, which is another kind of rūpa, conditions the
seeing too. In studying the teachings we will know more about the
different conditions and we will see how complex the way is in which
they operate each time we experience an object. When we know that there
are various factors which condition the arising of phenomena such as
seeing or hearing, we will better understand, at least in theory, that
seeing or hearing are only conditioned phenomena and that they do not
belong to a self. 

We should know, however, what kind of wisdom we want to develop; do we
want to develop only theoretical understanding of the truth, acquired
by thinking about it, or do we also want to develop the wisdom which
knows the truth through direct experience?

@emph{Question:} I do not understand the difference between thinking about the
truth and the direct experience of the truth. How can we directly
experience the truth?

@emph{Nina:} The truth can be known from direct experience; however, it is not
``self'' who knows it, but paññā . Paññā can directly know different
characteristics of nāma and rūpa when they appear. When we, for
example, are feeling hot, and sati is mindful of the characteristic of
heat, it can be realized by paññā as a kind of rūpa. It is not
necessary to think about it. At the moment we think about it or we call
it ``rūpa'', the characteristic of heat cannot be known. Only what
appears at the present moment can be directly known. Knowledge acquired
from the direct experience of realities is deeper than knowledge
acquired from thinking. 

@emph{Question:} When there is seeing, the seeing is conditioned by the rūpa
which is visible object and by the rūpa which is eyesense. Could I
experience the rūpas which condition the seeing?

@emph{Nina:} It is important to remember that we can experience only the nāma
or the rūpa which appears at the present moment; not the nāma or rūpa
which does not appear. It depends on one's accumulations and on the
development of wisdom which types of nāma and rūpa can be directly
understood. It is impossible to regulate which nāmas and rūpas we
should be aware of and in which order.

@emph{Question:} Is it right that we should not name realities when we are
aware of them, since they have fallen away by the time we name them?

@emph{Nina:} Is thinking of the name a reality? Does it appear?

@emph{Question:} Yes, it appears, it is a kind of nāma. We cannot help it that
this kind of nāma appears.

@emph{Nina:} That is right, it arises because of its own conditions. Do you not
think that this reality can be known as well? When there is seeing, the
characteristic of seeing can be known. When there is thinking about
seeing, there is a kind of nāma which is different from seeing. If we
try to regulate awareness and think that there should or should not be
awareness of particular realities, we do not realize that awareness is
anattā, non-self. Nāma and rūpa arise because of their own conditions,
they are beyond control. If we try to control sati we will not know
realities as they are.

@emph{Question:} I still think that it is better not to think of the names of
phenomena. Am I right?

@emph{Nina:} There is no need to think of their names; the characteristics of
nāma and rūpa can be directly experienced. But if the nāma arises which
thinks of a name, we cannot prevent it; thinking is a reality which has
its own characteristic and it can be known too. 

@emph{Question:} I have heard that the four Applications of Mindfulness or
``satipaṭṭhāna'' are: mindfulness of the body, mindfulness of feelings,
mindfulness of cittas and mindfulness of dhammas. How can I be aware in
accordance with the four Applications of Mindfulness?

@emph{Nina:} There is no need to think of the four Applications of Mindfulness
when we are aware of nāma and rūpa. We can develop understanding only
of the reality which appears at the present moment. The Buddha taught
the four Applications of Mindfulness in order to show people that all
nāmas and rūpas can be object of mindfulness. This does not mean that
we should think of those four Applications when we are aware. We cannot
control which nāma or rūpa will appear; they are anattā, non-self.

@emph{Question:} Can what we call the ``ego'' be the object of mindfulness? In
which Application of Mindfulness is it included? 

@emph{Nina:} Where is your ``ego'' and what is its characteristic? How do you
experience it and through which door? Do you experience it through
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense or mind-door?

@emph{Question:} I can only think of the self but I cannot directly experience
its characteristic. 

@emph{Nina:} We can think of many different things, but the reality of that
moment is only thinking. In the development of insight we learn that
what we take for self are only nāma and rūpa which arise and fall away.
In reality there is nothing else besides nāma and rūpa. Since there is
no ``ego'' it is not included in any of the four Applications of
Mindfulness.

@emph{Question:} What about realities outside ourselves, can we have wrong view
about them?

@emph{Nina:} Can you give an example of realities outside ourselves?

@emph{Question:} I mean things such as a bottle, a table or a chair.

@emph{Nina:} Things such as a bottle, a table or a chair are not ultimate
realities, they are concepts we can think of. Because of ignorance and
wrong view we take them for lasting things which are real. It is
important to know the difference between ultimate realities, nāma and
rūpa, which have each their own characteristic, and concepts. What we
take for a bottle, a table or a chair are in reality different kinds of
rūpas which arise and fall away. Rūpas which fall away are replaced by
new ones so long as there are conditions for them. 

The wrong understanding of reality can only be eliminated if the
characteristics of nāma and rūpa are known when they appear one at a
time through the different doorways. 

@emph{Question:} I heard of people who concentrate on the movement of the
abdomen. They say that sometimes there is awareness of the arising and
falling of rūpa and sometimes there is awareness of the knowing of the
arising and falling of rūpa. Is this the right way of developing
awareness?

@emph{Nina:} What we call abdomen is in reality many different kinds of rūpa.
Sati can be aware of only one characteristic of rūpa at a time. For
example, through the bodysense we can experience the characteristics of
hardness, softness, heat, cold, motion and pressure, but we can
experience only one of these characteristics at a time.

@emph{Question:} When we experience the rūpa which is motion do we not
experience the arising and falling away of rūpa?

@emph{Nina:} In the development of vipassanā there are several stages of
insight-knowledge (vipassanā-ñaṇa). The first stage is knowing
through direct experience the difference between the characteristic of
nāma and the characteristic of rūpa (in Pāli:
nāma-rūpa-pariccheda-ñāṇa). At the attainment of this stage there
is no doubt about the difference between the characteristic of nāma and
the characteristic of rūpa which appear at that moment. The development
of vipassanā, however, has to continue in order to have a clearer
understanding of nāma and rūpa. Only at a later stage can the arising
and falling away of nāma and rūpa be known. This stage cannot be
attained unless the previous stages have been realized. How could there
be direct understanding of the arising and falling away of a nāma or a
rūpa if the difference between the characteristics of nāma and rūpa is
not clearly discerned first?

@emph{Question:} Is the arising and falling away of rūpa faster than the
movement of the abdomen?

@emph{Nina:} Nāmas and rūpas arise and fall away extremely rapidly. For
example, it seems that there can be seeing and hearing at the same
time. In reality this is not so. Hearing can arise very closely after
seeing, but when there is hearing, the seeing has fallen away already
since there can be only one citta at a time. From this example we see
that cittas arise and fall away very rapidly, succeeding one another.
Although we know that realities arise and fall away, we do not have yet
direct understanding of this truth. The understanding of the different
characteristics of nāma and rūpa has to become keener and keener. Only
when insight is highly developed can there be direct understanding of
the arising and falling away of nāma and rūpa. 

@emph{Question:} How can understanding become keener?

@emph{Nina:} Only by being aware of nāmas and rūpas when they appear, one at a
time. Is there not seeing now, or hearing now? If one tries to
concentrate on particular nāmas and rūpas there is only thinking, not
the direct knowledge of whatever reality appears at the present moment.
Realities such as seeing, hearing, hardness or thinking arise because
of their own conditions, we cannot regulate their arising. Should we
not know their characteristics? Or should we continue to remain
ignorant of them? If we try to concentrate on one nāma or rūpa we are
clinging and this will not lead to detachment from the concept of self.

@emph{Question:} It seems that we have to be aware of so many different nāmas
and rūpas.

@emph{Nina:} We have to be aware of nāma and rūpa over and over again in order
to become detached from the notion of self. It is not sufficient to be
aware of only one kind of nāma or rūpa. There should be awareness of
whatever reality appears. If there is right awareness, without the
concept of self who has awareness, this will be a condition for paññā 
to gradually know more nāmas and rūpas. There is no self who can
control anything.

@emph{Question:} I can see that it is useful to know in theory about the
difference between nāma and rūpa. But when we are aware of nāma and
rūpa I am inclined to think that it is not necessary to distinguish
between them; I doubt whether that will help us to become detached from
the concept of self. 

@emph{Nina:} How can there be a precise knowledge of realities if we cannot
realize the difference between nāma, the reality which experiences
something, feels or remembers, and rūpa, the reality which does not
experience anything? If we do not realize the difference between nāma
and rūpa we confuse, for example, hearing, which is nāma, and sound,
which is rūpa. When there is hearing there is also sound, but sati can
be mindful of only one characteristic at a time. Sometimes there may be
mindfulness of hearing, sometimes of sound. If we do not know which
characteristic appears, hearing or sound, it is clear that we are still
ignorant of the reality appearing at the present moment. 

@emph{Question:} The reality of the present moment falls away so quickly, how
can we ever catch it?

@emph{Nina:} If we try to ``catch'' a reality, we do not have the right
understanding and thus the truth will not be known. Realities are
experienced through six doorways, but if insight has not been developed
we cannot clearly know which reality is experienced through which
doorway. So long as there is no precise knowledge of the
characteristics of realities, there can be no detachment from the
concept of self. When insight is more developed, paññā will know which
reality is experienced through which doorway.

@emph{Question:} Is it difficult to know that a reality is nāma or that it is
rūpa? It does not seem very difficult.

@emph{Nina:} You may think that it is very simple to know that seeing is a kind
of nāma, different from visible object which is rūpa, but are you sure
as to what appears at the present moment, whether it is nāma or rūpa?
Is there sati and of what is it mindful?

@emph{Question:} I am not sure about the reality appearing at the present
moment. It seems as if seeing and visible object appear at the same
time.

@emph{Nina:} Awareness can be aware of only one reality at a time. When it
seems to us that seeing and visible object ``appear'' at the same time,
then there is no sati, there is only thinking about phenomena. When one
has not yet developed precise understanding of realities, they are not
known as they appear one at a time. One may know in theory that nāma is
different from rūpa, but that is not the paññā which leads to
detachment from the concept of self.

The difference between the nāma and rūpa which appear should be known,
but we should not try to ``catch'' the reality of the present moment.
When we have just started to develop insight, there cannot yet be a
clear understanding of realities. When there has been mindfulness time
and again of characteristics of realities, paññā will develop until it
is so keen that we do not take realities for self anymore. 

@node The Eightfold Path
@chapter The Eightfold Path

@emph{Questioner:} I understand that awareness or mindfulness is useful; but I
still do not know how to be mindful in daily life. I feel I have no
time for it; I have to do my work.

@emph{Nina:} The development of insight, vipassanā, is precisely the
development of right understanding of ourselves, of our daily life.
However, it seems that people want to know many other things but not
themselves. Are we afraid of knowing ourselves? The Buddha pointed out
that knowing ourselves is more beneficial than knowing other things.

We read in the Visuddhimagga (XII, 82) that the Buddha so acted that
King Mahā-Kappina and his retinue were invisible to the queen who had
followed him with one thousand women attendants and who was sitting
nearby. We read:

@quotation

@dots{}And when it was asked, ``Have you seen the king, venerable sir?'', he
asked: ``But which is better for you, to seek the king or to seek
yourself?'' She replied, ``Myself, venerable sir''. Then he likewise
taught her the Dhamma as she sat there, so that, together with the
thousand women attendants, she became established in the fruition of
stream entry (sotāpanna), while the ministers reached the fruition of
non-return (anāgāmī), and the king that of arahatship. 

@end quotation



The development of insight should not be separated from daily life; it
is precisely in our daily life that insight, right understanding of
realities, should be developed. There should be awareness of nāmas and
rūpas which appear in our daily life. Thus we develop the eightfold
Path. If people say that they have no time to develop insight they have
not understood what the eightfold Path is.

@emph{Question:} What exactly is the eightfold Path? Is it the same as
mindfulness? Is it essential for the attainment of enlightenment? Will
it make us happier and does it help us to fulfil our duties better?

@emph{Nina:} When we speak about a reality we should know what type of reality
it is, otherwise we cannot have a clear understanding of it. Which
ultimate reality, paramattha dhamma@footnote{A reality with its own
unchangeable characteristic which can be known through direct
experience when it presents itself through one of the six doors. It is
different from concepts or ideas of which we may think, but which are
not real in the ultimate sense.}, is the eightfold Path? There are
four paramattha dhammas:

@itemize
@item
citta (consciousness)

@item
cetasika (mental factor arising with the citta)

@item
rūpa (physical phenomena)

@item
nibbāna

@end itemize
The eightfold Path consists of eight factors and these are cetasikas.
They are sobhana cetasikas (beautiful mental factors) arising with the
sobhana citta which is mindful of a characteristic of nāma or rūpa. In
being mindful of nāma and rūpa the eightfold Path is developed. At the
attainment of enlightenment the eight factors arise with the lokuttara
citta, ``supramundane citta'', which experiences nibbāna. Then the Path
is lokuttara. When the factors of the eightfold Path do not arise with
the lokuttara citta the Path is ``lokiya'', ``mundane''. 

You asked me whether the eightfold Path is the same as mindfulness.
Mindfulness, sati, is one of the factors of the eightfold Path; it is
called ``sammā-sati''@footnote{Sammā means: right.} or ``right
mindfulness''. As we have seen, sati arises with sobhana citta. Sati is
sammā-sati of the eightfold Path when it arises with the paññā , wisdom,
which understands a characteristic of nāma or rūpa appearing through
one of the six doors. Any time there is mindfulness of a characteristic
of nāma or rūpa which appears, the eightfold Path is being developed. 

@emph{Question:} Thus, the object of the eightfold Path has to be any
characteristic of nāma or rūpa which appears through one of the six
doors, is that right?

@emph{Nina:} That is right. A person or a tree are concepts or ideas we can
think of, but they are not ultimate realities which appear one at a
time through the six doors. Only ultimate realities are the object of
the eightfold Path. Seeing is a reality with its own unchangeable
characteristic which can be directly known, without the need to think
about it. Seeing is a nāma which experiences visible object, that which
appears through eyesense; there is no person who sees. Hearing is
another reality with its own unchangeable characteristic; it can be
directly known when it appears. Hearing is a nāma which experiences
sound through earsense; there is no person who hears. If we learn to
see nāma and rūpa as they are the wrong view of self will be
eradicated.

@emph{Question:} I have learned that the objects of the eightfold Path are
those of the Four Applications of Mindfulness or ``satipaṭṭhāna'' which
are the application of mindfulness of the body, of feelings, of cittas
and of dhammas. Is sound included in the objects of mindfulness? 

@emph{Nina:} Is sound real?

@emph{Question:} It is real.

@emph{Nina:} Why is it real?

@emph{Question:} Anybody can experience sound through the ears.

@emph{Nina:} Since sound is a reality which can be experienced can there not be
awareness of it?

@emph{Question:} Yes, there can be awareness of it.

@emph{Nina:} Sound is an object of mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna because it is a
reality with its own characteristic which can be experienced. If there
is mindfulness of the characteristic of sound more often, we will learn
that it is only a kind of rūpa which can be experienced through the
ear-door and which is different from the nāma which experiences sound.

@emph{Question:} What about unhappy feeling, is it also object of mindfulness?

@emph{Nina:} Is it real? 

@emph{Question:} Certainly.

@emph{Nina:} Thus it is object of mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna. All realities
which can be experienced through the six doors can be objects of
mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna. 

As regards your question whether the eightfold Path is essential for the
attainment of enlightenment: it is essential, there is no other way.
When one attains the first stage of enlightenment, the stage of the
sotāpanna, the wrong view of self is eradicated completely. The
clinging to the concept of self can be eradicated only if we develop
the wisdom which clearly knows that all phenomena in us and around us
are only nāma and rūpa and nothing else but nāma and rūpa. Thus
realities will be known as they are.

You also asked me whether the eightfold Path will make us happier,
whether it helps us to fulfil our duties better. Our own defilements
make us unhappy and at times we find life very difficult. In developing
the eightfold Path we do not immediately eradicate defilements but we
acquire a clearer understanding of our life. When there is less
clinging to the notion of self, there is less darkness in our life.
Right understanding is to the benefit of both ourselves and others.
When we have more understanding of our own life we will also have more
understanding of others. Through the development of satipaṭṭhāna there
can gradually be more conditions for kusala cittas with kindness and
compassion. When we do our daily tasks with kusala cittas do you not
think that they are performed better?

@emph{Question:} You explained that the eight factors of the Path are eight
sobhana cetasikas, beautiful mental factors. Do all eight factors have
to arise with the citta which is mindful?

@emph{Nina:} Not all eight factors arise together when the citta is not
lokuttara citta, ``supramundane citta'' experiencing nibbāna. When
lokuttara citta arises at the attainment of enlightenment all eight
factors accompany the citta.

@emph{Question:} What is the first factor of the eightfold Path?

@emph{Nina:} The first factor is sammā-diṭṭhi, right view or right
understanding. Sammā-diṭṭhi is the kind of paññā which directly
understands a characteristic of nāma or rūpa, appearing through one of
the six doors. Without right understanding of nāma and rūpa and of the
way to develop the eightfold Path enlightenment cannot be attained. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Book XII, Kindred Sayings about the
Truths, Ch IV, par 7, The Parable of the Sun) that right view is the
``forerunner'' of full comprehension of the four noble Truths. The four
noble Truths are realised at the attainment of enlightenment. We read
that the Buddha said:

@quotation
Monks, just as the dawn is the forerunner, the harbinger, of the arising
of the sun, even so is right view the forerunner, the harbinger, of
fully comprehending the four Ariyan truths. 

Of a monk who has right view it may be expected that he will understand
as it really is: This is dukkha@dots{}this is the arising of dukkha@enddots{}
this is the ceasing of dukkha@dots{}this is the way leading to the ceasing
of dukkha.

Wherefore, monks, an effort must be made to realise: This is dukkha,
this is the arising of dukkha, this is the ceasing of dukkha, this is
the way leading to the ceasing of dukkha.

@end quotation

We should know to what end we wish to develop the eightfold Path. Why do
you want to develop it?

@emph{Question:} I want to develop it in order to eradicate defilements such as
anger, jealousy, stinginess, and all other kinds of impurities @minus{}in other
words, everything which is degrading and immoral.

@emph{Nina:} People think that vipassanā can solve all their problems at once
and they believe that defilements can be eradicated immediately. But
for how many lives have we accumulated defilements? Since these lives
are countless how could we eradicate defilements immediately? So long
as we are not yet ariyans the aim of our development of vipassanā is to
know the truth about ourselves, in order to eradicate the wrong view of
self. We have to be so very patient. We should not forget the sutta
about the knife-handle (Kindred Sayings III, Middle Fifty, Ch V, par 101,
Adze-handle), where we read that the Buddha said:

@quotation
@dots{}Just as if, monks, when a carpenter or carpenter's apprentice looks
upon his adze-handle and sees thereon his thumb-mark and his
finger-marks he does not thereby know: ``So and so much of my
adze-handle has been worn away today, so much yesterday, so much at
other times.'' But he knows the wearing away of it just by its wearing
away.
@end quotation

Even so some of the wrong view is eliminated each time there is
mindfulness of nāma or rūpa, but we cannot see how much is eliminated
each day. 

@emph{Question:} But when there is strong attachment or when we are very angry
how can there be awareness at the same time?

@emph{Nina:} When there is a lobha-mūla-citta (citta rooted in attachment) or a
dosa-mūla-citta ( citta rooted in ill-will), there cannot be a citta
with mindfulness at the same time, since there can only be one citta at
a time. But shortly after the akusala citta has fallen away there can
be kusala citta with mindfulness. The characteristic of akusala can
then be the object of mindfulness, and it can be known as nāma, not
self. 

@emph{Question:} Can we not be so disturbed by lobha or dosa, especially when
they are intense, that awareness is impossible? 

@emph{Nina:} Are strong desire and intense anger realities?

@emph{Question:} Yes, they appear, they are realities. 

@emph{Nina:} Then they can be known as they are. If one makes oneself believe
that it is impossible to be aware of particular realities, one has not
understood what the eightfold Path is: the development of right
understanding of whatever reality appears. Some people are so afraid of
akusala citta that they try to flee from the reality which appears at
that moment. They think that they should apply themselves to a
particular practice, such as concentrating on their breathing, in order
to regulate awareness. When they act in this way without awareness of
the reality which appears at the present moment, they are not
developing the eightfold Path. When one develops the eightfold Path
which is called the ``middle way'', there should be awareness of any kind
of reality which appears, even if it is akusala. 

We may be inclined to think that there should not be mindfulness of
akusala cittas, especially of those types we find particularly ugly
such as cittas with strong desire or anger. Why should we be worried by
the reality which appears, even if it is akusala citta? We cannot
change the reality which has already appeared, but we can know its
characteristic. It is useless to go on worrying about strong desire or
anger. At such moments there are nāma and rūpa. Why would it not be
possible to know these realities as they are: only conditioned
phenomena which are not self? 

Through vipassanā we come to know more our akusala cittas, not only the
coarse ones but also the more subtle ones. Not only strong desire is
lobha, but also enjoyment of beautiful things is lobha. We cannot force
ourselves not to enjoy beautiful things since we have accumulated
attachment, but we should know that at such moments the cittas are not
kusala cittas but akusala cittas. The ``middle way'' is not forcing
oneself to particular practices in order to suppress attachment, but it
is knowing whatever reality appears. We should also know
moha-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in ignorance) as they are. Most of the
time we do not realize when there are moha-mūla-cittas because
moha-mūla-citta is not accompanied by pleasant feeling or by unpleasant
feeling, but by indifferent feeling. We may not realize that when the
feeling is indifferent there can be akusala citta. When there are no
kusala cittas, there are not only many moments of lobha-mūla-citta and
dosa-mūla-citta, but also of moha-mūla-citta. We are often ignorant of
the nāmas and rūpas which appear, there are countless moments of
forgetfulness and ignorance. Moha is dangerous. The moha of today
conditions moha in the future. How many more lives will we be ignorant
of realities? Through the development of vipassanā we will realize that
we are still ignorant of many realities. 

@emph{Question:} I thought that the Buddha said that one should be aware every
time one is breathing in and breathing out. Should we not concentrate
on breathing?

@emph{Nina:} So long as we are breathing there is still life. All through life
mindfulness should be developed. In vipassanā one does not select any
particular object of mindfulness. There can be mindfulness of whatever
kind of nāma or rūpa appears through one of the six doors; in this way
wrong view and doubt about the realities one takes for ``self'' can be
eradicated.

In vipassanā one does not have to follow any rule. One does not have to
concentrate on breathing; if one selects the object of awareness and in
this way tries to control sati, there will not be detachment from the
wrong view of self. When we speak of breathing, we are using a
conventional term of every day language. What are the realities which
can be directly experienced when breathing? There can be awareness of
phenomena such as softness, hardness, heat, cold, motion or pressure
when they present themselves through the door of the bodysense, and
they can be known as different kinds of rūpa. Nāmas and rūpas appear,
but there is no self who can decide of which reality there should be
awareness. 

@emph{Question:} Reflecting on what you said about awareness of nāma and rūpa,
I can accept and understand that there is no self, but I cannot
experience it as the truth. And sometimes I still feel that there must
be a self who directs the mind and makes decisions. Suppose that I
decide today to study the teachings and to observe the five precepts; I
find it difficult to believe that there is not an ego or self who makes
this choice, this decision.

@emph{Nina:} So long as we are not ariyans, the wrong view of self has not been
eradicated; there are yet conditions for clinging to the concept of
self. Awareness of nāmas and rūpas will gradually lead to a clearer
understanding of what things really are. Then we shall realize that
decision-making is a type of nāma arising because of conditions. When
wisdom has been developed to the degree that enlightenment can be
attained there will be no more doubt about realities and there will be
the clear comprehension that there is no self.

In order to develop the right Path there must be from the beginning
right understanding about the way of development. If there is some
misunderstanding in the beginning one may go the wrong way for a long
time. It may be very hard to find the right way again. If one continues
having wrong understanding, for how many more lives will there be wrong
view? 

@emph{Question:} Is the development of the right Path just watching or
observing all the phenomena of one's life?

@emph{Nina:} Who is watching? There may be an idea of self who is watching and
one may not notice this.

The development of right understanding is not watching or observing.
When visible object appears it can be known as only a reality which is
experienced through the eyesense, not somebody, not something. When
seeing appears it can be known as only the experience of visible
object, no self who sees. When one pays attention to the shape and form
of something there is another type of nāma, different from seeing, and
its characteristic can be known too. All realities which appear through
the six doors can be object of mindfulness. Mindfulness is not self, it
arises because it is conditioned by listening to the Dhamma, by the
study of the Dhamma and by right consideration of it. From the
beginning there should not be an idea of self who is watching phenomena
or who can select the object of mindfulness.

A very precise knowledge of all the different phenomena which appear
should be developed in order to see them as they are, as anattā, beyond
control. This is the development of the eightfold Path.

@node Factors of the Eightfold Path
@chapter Factors of the Eightfold Path

@emph{Questioner:} It is important to cultivate wholesomeness, not only in our
actions and speech but in our thinking as well. It is, however,
impossible to think wholesome thoughts all the time because we have
accumulated many defilements. When we think of the virtues of the
Buddha there are at those moments wholesome thoughts, but we cannot
continually think of wholesome things; we cannot help it that
unwholesome thoughts arise many times during the day. How can we stop
unwholesome thinking?

@emph{Nina:} When we recollect the Buddha's virtues and when we are grateful
for the Dhamma he taught out of compassion for the world, it is a
condition for wholesome thinking. We could visit the four holy places:
the place of the Buddha's birth, of his enlightenment, of his first
sermon and of his final passing away. In visiting those holy places we
give expression to our deep confidence in his teachings and our
gratefulness for the Dhamma which even after 2500 years can still help
us now, at this very moment. The holy places remind us not to be
neglectful of mindfulness; they are conditions for many kusala cittas.

When there are kusala cittas there are at those moments no conditions
for unwholesome thinking, but it is not eradicated. Only by the
cultivation of the eightfold Path, which is the development of insight,
will unwholesome thinking eventually be eradicated. In the development
of vipassanā there can also be mindfulness of thinking which is
unwholesome. We may not like to be mindful of unwholesome thinking, but
it is a reality, it arises, and thus its characteristic can be
investigated. The Four Applications of Mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna
include all realities. If we understand that there isn't anything which
cannot be object of mindfulness, we will gradually realize that all
phenomena are only nāma and rūpa. Thus, when unwholesome thinking
appears why can it not be known as only a type of nāma? When paññā 
knows the characteristic of this reality more clearly, there will be
less inclination to take it for self. So long as we are not yet arahats
unwholesomeness is bound to arise. It can only be completely eradicated
when one has attained arahatship.

@emph{Question:} I learned that ``right thinking'' or ``sammā-saṇkappa'' is
one of the factors of the eightfold Path. Is sammā-saṇkappa
thinking of nāma and rūpa?

@emph{Nina:} Sammā-saṇkappa is the cetasika, mental factor, which is
``vitakka'' or ``thinking''. Vitakka is usually translated into English as
``applied thought''. The characteristic of vitakka is different from what
we mean by the word ``thinking'' as we use it in conventional language.
Vitakka performs a specific function when it accompanies the citta. The
Visuddhimagga (IV, 88) states about vitakka: 

@dots{}It has the characteristic of directing the mind onto an object
(mounting the mind on its object). Its function is to strike and
thresh@dots{}It is manifested as the leading of the mind onto an object.

Vitakka accompanies many cittas but not every citta. It arises together
with the citta and falls away with the citta. When vitakka accompanies
akusala citta it is also akusala, and when it accompanies kusala citta
it is also kusala. When vitakka accompanies the citta with right
understanding (sammā-diṭṭhi) and right mindfulness (sammā-sati) of the
eightfold Path it is called sammā-saṇkappa, right thinking, of
the eightfold Path. When there is right mindfulness of a nāma or rūpa
which appears through one of the six doors, sammā-saṇkappa hits
or ``touches'' the nāma or rūpa which is the object of mindfulness so
that sammā-diṭṭhi can investigate that object in order to know it as it
is. When right understanding has not been developed yet, we may doubt
whether the reality which appears is nāma or rūpa. When there is seeing
which is nāma there is also visible object which is rūpa, but only one
reality at a time can be object of mindfulness. It is the function of
sammā-saṇkappa to ``touch'' the reality appearing at the present
moment so that right understanding can investigate its characteristic.
Right understanding needs right thinking in order to investigate the
characteristics of nāma and rūpa and to see realities as they are.
Thus, sammā-saṇkappa is indispensable for the development of
right understanding. If we understand the function of
sammā-saṇkappa, it is clear that sammā-saṇkappa is not
thinking about nāma or rūpa. 

@emph{Question:} Can sammā-saṇkappa destroy wrong thinking?

@emph{Nina:} Sammā-saṇkappa arises together with the citta which is
accompanied by right mindfulness and right understanding. It directs
the citta in the right way towards the object of mindfulness and at
that moment there cannot be wrong thinking. After the moment of
mindfulness, however, wrong thinking or thinking which is akusala can
arise again, but if one continues developing the eightfold Path it will
eventually be destroyed. 

@emph{Question:} I heard someone say that in order to develop mindfulness one
should stop thinking. Is this a right method? 

@emph{Nina:} How could we prevent ourselves from thinking? Throughout our life
objects are presenting themselves through the senses and through the
mind-door. Cittas which think of these objects are real. Why can there
not be mindfulness of thinking? Otherwise we will not see that it is
anattā, not self. The moment we try to control thinking it has fallen
away, it already belongs to the past. When there is awareness of a
characteristic of nāma or rūpa, there is at that moment no clinging to
a concept of self who tries to stop thinking or to control sati in
other ways. Awareness of whatever reality appears, that is the
development of the eightfold Path.

@emph{Question:} We have spoken already about sammā-diṭṭhi,
sammā-saṇkappa and sammā-sati, but there are eight factors of the
eightfold Path. Could you tell me which are the factors of the
eightfold Path? 

@emph{Nina:} The eight factors are: 

@itemize

@item
Right understanding, sammā-diṭṭhi 

@item
Right thinking, sammā-saṇkappa

@item
Right speech, sammā-vācā

@item
Right bodily action, sammā-kammanta

@item
Right livelihood, sammā-ājīva

@item
Right effort, sammā-vāyāma

@item
Right mindfulness, sammā-sati

@item
Right concentration, sammā-samādhi

@end itemize

@emph{Question:} What are the functions of right speech, right bodily action
and right livelihood?

@emph{Nina:} They are three sobhana cetasikas, beautiful mental factors, which
abstain from wrong speech, wrong bodily action and wrong livelihood.
They are the factors which are sīla or morality. Right speech is
abstaining from wrong speech, which is lying, slandering, rude speech
and idle talk. Right action is abstaining from wrong bodily action,
which is killing, stealing and sexual misbehaviour. Right livelihood is
abstaining from wrong livelihood, which is wrong bodily action and
wrong speech committed for the sake of earning a living. 

@emph{Question:} How can I abstain from wrong speech? I find that when I am
with other people who speak in an unwholesome way I am inclined to do
the same.

@emph{Nina:} So long as we are not yet arahats we will still speak in an
unwholesome way. But the Buddha's teachings can be the condition for us
to have less akusala in our life. When people speak in an unpleasant
way about others or when they complain about disagreeable things which
happen in life we may be inclined to follow their example. But through
the study of the teachings and the development of satipaṭṭhāna we will
realize more often when there are akusala cittas. Gradually we can
learn to abstain from wrong speech. We may have compassion for those
who speak in the wrong way, we may try to help them to have kusala
cittas instead of akusala cittas.

@emph{Question:} We may know this in theory, but I find the practice of the
teachings very difficult. I have spoken the wrong words already before
I realize it.

@emph{Nina:} Through the development of right understanding habits and
accumulations can gradually be changed. But there is no self who could
change habits and accumulations. The right understanding of the Dhamma
and the application of the Dhamma in one's life are conditions for
change. Then we can prove to ourselves that the Buddha's teachings are
the truth; and our confidence in the teachings will be deeper. 

@emph{Question:} Can you give an example of right action?

@emph{Nina:} When we are inclined to kill an insect which is stinging us, but
then, instead of having aversion, we abstain from killing, we are
observing sīla. It is not self who abstains, but the cetasika which is
right action performs its function. 

@emph{Question:} I know of someone who says that he cannot help killing. When
an insect bites him it is his reflex to kill it. Is the development of
right understanding a condition for abstaining from wrong action?

@emph{Nina:} Right understanding of nāma and rūpa conditions us to realize more
often the danger of akusala and the benefit of kusala. At the moment of
mindfulness of a reality which appears through one of the six doors
there is kusala citta. Kusala citta cannot be accompanied by dosa, it
is accompanied by adosa. Adosa is non-aversion or loving-kindness. Right
understanding can gradually be the condition that kindness and
compassion arise more often. We will be more inclined to think of the
happiness of other beings. Should we cause insects to have pain, should
we destroy their lives? 

@emph{Question:} When one develops right understanding of the eightfold Path do
the sobhana cetasikas of right action, right speech and right
livelihood destroy wrong action, wrong speech and wrong livelihood? 

@emph{Nina:} The development of right understanding is a condition for more
wholesomeness in our life, but akusala cannot be eradicated
immediately. There are at times conditions for abstaining from
unwholesome actions and unwholesome speech, but, when enlightenment has
not been attained sīla is not enduring. When we are in difficult
situations we may kill and we may lie. The sotāpanna, the person who
has attained the first stage of enlightenment has no more conditions
for committing akusala kamma which can cause an unhappy rebirth. He has
no more conditions to transgress the five precepts. However, he has not
eradicated all kinds of unwholesomeness. He has eradicated wrong bodily
action, and as regards wrong speech, he has eradicated lying, but he
has not eradicated the other kinds of wrong speech. He has eradicated
wrong livelihood, he cannot commit wrong action or wrong speech for the
sake of earning a living. Thus we see that the development of right
understanding will bear directly on our action and speech in daily
life. 

When the citta is not lokuttara citta, supramundane citta which
experiences nibbāna, the three factors of right speech, right action
and right livelihood arise one at a time, depending on the given
situation. When we abstain from wrong action, we do not abstain at the
same time from wrong speech. At the attainment of enlightenment,
however, all three factors arise together while they accompany the
lokuttara citta which experiences nibbāna. They perform at that moment
their functions as Path factors which is the eradication of the causes
of misconduct as to speech, action and livelihood. Latent tendencies to
defilements are eradicated so that they do not arise anymore.
Defilements are progressively eradicated at the different stages of
enlightenment and it is only at the final stage, the stage of the
arahat, that all kinds of akusala are completely eradicated. 

@emph{Question:} Can there be awareness of nāma and rūpa while we abstain from
unwholesomeness?

@emph{Nina:} There can be the development of right understanding in any
situation, no matter whether we have akusala cittas or whether we
abstain from akusala. We gradually learn that there is no self who has
kusala citta or akusala citta, but that these types of citta arise
because of their own conditions. Through the development of right
understanding sīla will become purer because one will realize that it
is not self who observes sīla. 

@emph{Question:} So long as one has not become a sotāpanna the observing of the
five precepts which include abstaining from wrong bodily action and
from lying cannot be enduring. There will be situations that one will
transgress them. As regards wrong livelihood, for some people it is
very difficult to abstain from it. I heard of someone who has no choice
but to kill chickens in order to earn a living for his family. Every
day he has to kill, but he says that he performs dāna, generosity, in
order to compensate for his killing. Can he compensate in that way?

@emph{Nina:} We cannot compensate for bad actions by good actions, because
every deed brings about its appropriate result. The killing, which is
akusala kamma, may cause an unhappy rebirth, even if we perform good
deeds as well. 

@emph{Question:} But this person cannot earn a living in any other way. He used
to have another kind of business but he could not earn enough money to
take care of his family. Some people have no choice; they have to do
wrong actions for their livelihood. 

@emph{Nina:} Nothing in life happens without conditions. One's accumulated
defilements cause one to have a profession by which one is involved in
killing animals or trading in arms or alcoholic drinks. These
professions are wrong livelihood; they are conditions for akusala
kamma. It is sati which could, one day, make a person change his
profession which is wrong livelihood. People may think that it is
impossible to change their profession, but if there is the development
of right understanding of realities there will be conditions for
earning one's living without having to perform akusala kamma. As we
have seen, the sotāpanna has completely eradicated the tendency to
wrong livelihood. 

@emph{Question:} What about people who are not trading in the things you just
mentioned, but who are what we call ``in business''? I would think that
if one is to make a profit one cannot always be telling the truth.
Should business-men change their profession in order to be pure in
their livelihood? I know someone who was formerly in business but
changed his profession. He now works for a newspaper because he sees
this profession as an opportunity to serve other people better.

@emph{Nina:} We cannot say that someone should or should not do particular
things, because whatever we do in life is dependent on conditions.
There is no self who makes a choice, there are cittas arising because
of their own conditions. People who are in business may perform akusala
kamma, as for instance, when they are dishonest and harm other people
in the way they make their profit. But they can have kusala cittas too.
They may abstain from telling lies even though they know that this will
cause them to have less profit. Thus, at different moments there are
different conditions for akusala cittas and for kusala cittas which
arise. 

@emph{Question:} What about a professional soldier? Can he ever have right
livelihood?

@emph{Nina:} He can have akusala cittas and kusala cittas at different moments.
When he kills others he performs akusala kamma, but he may also perform
wholesome deeds. 

In the Sutta of the Highest Blessings (Mahā-Maṅgala Sutta,
Sutta-Nipāta, Khuddaka Nikāya) we read among others about the following
blessing: ``Supporting mother and father, cherishing wife and children,
and peaceful occupations this is the highest blessing.''

Soldiers, however, can and should cultivate kusala kamma too. We read in
the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Eights, Ch II, par 2, Sīha, the
general)) that Sīha the general visited the Buddha and gained
confidence in him. We read:

@quotation
Then the Exalted One preached a graduated discourse to Sīha, the
general, that is to say: on alms-giving, the precepts and on heaven. He
set forth the peril, the folly and the depravity of lusts and the
blessedness of renunciation.

And when the Exalted One knew that the heart of Sīha, the general, was
clear, malleable, free from hindrance, uplifted and lucid, then he
revealed that teaching of Dhamma which Buddhas alone have won, that is
to say: Dukkha, its coming-to-be, its ending and the Way. Just as a
clean cloth, free of all stain, will take dye perfectly; even so in
Sīha, the general, seated there, there arose the spotless, stainless
vision of Dhamma: that whatsoever be conditioned by coming-to-be all
that is subject to ending@enddots{}
@end quotation

The commentary to this sutta, the ``Manorathapāraṇi'', explains that
Sīha became a sotāpanna. 

@emph{Question:} I think that those whose profession is government service have
more conditions for pure livelihood. They do not have to think about
making a profit for themselves.

@emph{Nina:} They may have many akusala cittas; they may have conceit, or they
may think of their own success. It all depends on the individual. When
we have chosen a profession, it shows that we have accumulations for
that profession. That profession is part of our daily life. During our
work we can develop mindfulness and right understanding of nāma and
rūpa. When we have more understanding of the Dhamma we can help other
people to understand it as well, and thus we serve society in the best
way, we contribute to peace in the world.

@emph{Question:} But can someone who has to think of money all day be aware of
nāma and rūpa?

@emph{Nina:} Do you handle money during the day?

@emph{Question:} Yes, it is part of our normal way of life. 

@emph{Nina:} Should you not be aware of realities when looking at money? Do you
think that there is anything which is not included in satipaṭṭhāna?

@emph{Question:} When I look at money visible object appears through the eyes.
When I touch it hardness or softness may appear through the bodysense.
But if I were aware only of those realities and did not know the value
of the banknote I would be poor very soon. Even though I believe that
awareness is very useful, yet I consider it to be a different section
of life. I lead two kinds of lives: my life of awareness which I lead
mostly at home, when I am alone, and my business life in which I have
to be practical. 

@emph{Nina:} Do you think that the Buddha said that there are times one should
not be mindful? He exhorted people to be aware, no matter what they
were doing.

@emph{Question:} But awareness is not always practical. For instance, when I am
opening the safe in my office I have to remember the numbers of the
combination-lock. If I were aware only of hardness, motion or visible
object, I could not open the safe. I thought that only absolute
realities, nāmas and rūpas which appear one at a time through the six
doors are objects of mindfulness. I thought that there cannot be
mindfulness while one is thinking of concepts.

@emph{Nina:} Why can there not be awareness when you know the value of a
banknote or when you remember the numbers of the combination-lock on
the safe? At such moments there is thinking of concepts, but is
thinking not a reality? Are there moments that there are not nāma and
rūpa? I agree that you have to be practical, but does that mean that
there cannot be awareness at the same time?

The Buddha's teachings are very practical. The Buddha gave many
practical guidelines for laypeople so that they could lead a life of
goodwill and benevolence in their social relations. He advised them on
the means for both their material welfare and their spiritual welfare.
We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Eights, Ch VI, par 4,
Longknee, the Koliyan) that, while the Buddha was staying among the
Koliyans, at Kakkarapatta, Longknee (also named ``Tigerfoot'') visited
the Buddha. He asked the Buddha whether he would teach Dhamma to people
like him, who are householders indulging in sense pleasures. He would
like the Buddha to teach him what would lead to happiness here on earth
and to happiness in the world to come. The Buddha said that four
conditions would lead to advantage and happiness here on earth, namely,
alertness, achievement in watchfulness, good company and the ``even
life''. As to alertness, he should be deft and tireless in his work, he
should have an enquiring turn of mind into ways and means, and be able
to carry out his job. As to ``accomplishment of watchfulness''@footnote{
Here I use the translation of the Wheel Publication no. 14, Buddhist
Publication Society, Sri Lanka. }, we read:

@quotation
What is the accomplishment of watchfulness? Herein, Tigerfoot
(Vyagghapajja), whatsoever wealth a householder is in possession of,
obtained by dint of effort, collected by strength of arm, by the sweat
of his brow, justly acquired by right means @minus{}such he looks after well by
guarding and watching so that kings would not seize it, thieves would
not steal it, fire would not burn it, water would not carry it away,
nor ill-disposed heirs would remove it. This is the accomplishment of
watchfulness@enddots{}


@end quotation

As to good company, the Buddha said that he should consort with those
who are full of faith, virtue, charity and wisdom, and try to be
likewise. As to the ``even life'', we read:

@quotation
@dots{}Herein a clansman while experiencing both gain and loss in wealth,
continues his business serenely, not unduly elated or depressed. He
thinks: ``Thus my income, after deducting loss, will stand (at so much)
and my outgoings will not exceed my income''@enddots{}

@end quotation

We read that there are four channels for the flowing away of amassed
wealth: ``looseness with women, debauchery in drinking, knavery in
dice-play and friendship, companionship and intimacy with evil doers.''
The Buddha explained that there are four conditions for happiness in
the world to come: achievement in faith, namely, confidence in the
Buddha, achievement in virtue, that is, abstaining from ill deeds,
achievement in generosity and achievement in wisdom. 

The Buddha would not teach anything which is not practical and
beneficial. There should be awareness not only of realities which
appear through the five sense-doors, but also of realities which appear
through the mind-door. When we are thinking of concepts, there can be
awareness of thinking. Can you help knowing the value of a banknote? Is
knowing this a reality?

@emph{Question:} Yes, it is a reality. 

@emph{Nina:} Anything which is real can be object of mindfulness. Some people
think that there should be awareness only of some particular kinds of
nāma and rūpa, such as seeing and visible object. They think that
knowing what something is, as for instance, knowing the value of a
banknote or knowing whether the traffic light is green or red, is not
included in satipaṭṭhāna. Don't you think that unnatural? I have heard
of someone who, while he is developing insight, believes that he cannot
recognize his friends or his parents. If one cannot recognize anything
while one is ``mindful'' it means that one could not be aware during
one's daily activities. It means that if one were to drive a car and be
``mindful'' at the same time, one would not know when the traffic light
is green and when it is red. That is not the right path. Recognising
something is a reality as well, it is a type of nāma which recognizes
something, it is not self who recognizes. The development of the
eightfold Path is the development of right understanding of all
realities of our daily life. 

@emph{Question:} I still do not see how one can lead one's daily life while one
develops vipassanā. I have heard that it is forbidden to take alcoholic
drinks while one develops vipassanā.

@emph{Nina:} No one can force another person to abstain from drinking, nor can
one force oneself, since it is not self who indulges in drinking or
abstains from it, but nāma, arising because of conditions. It is not
self but sati which keeps someone from drinking. When sati has been
accumulated more it is a condition for gradually becoming less attached
to drinking. However, only the ariyan can observe the five precepts
perfectly. Since at the attainment of enlightenment all tendencies to
wrong bodily action and to the wrong speech which is lying were
eradicated, it has become his nature to observe the five precepts.
People who are not ariyans may transgress them. For example, when there
are conditions it could happen that we kill in order to protect our
lives. However, if one learns to develop satipaṭṭhāna, it will
gradually lead to changing one's way of life and to refraining from
akusala kamma. 

@emph{Question:} Thus, mindfulness can bring about what I would consider a
miracle, a transformation in character, is that right?

@emph{Nina:} People would like to change their characters but they do not know
how to do it. Would you like to see a change in your character for the
better? Is there a way? Everything occurs because of conditions. The
condition for a change in one's life is vipassanā, the right
understanding of realities. However, a sudden transformation of
character cannot be expected. People can see for themselves that while
they develop the eightfold Path they come to know more and more their
defilements, also the subtle ones. When there is less ignorance of the
realities of one's life it means that there is already a gradual change
in one's character, even though enlightenment has not been attained. 

@node Right Effort
@chapter Right Effort

@emph{Questioner:} Awareness arises when there are conditions. We cannot make
awareness arise at will; awareness is anattā. It would seem, therefore,
that we cannot make an effort to have awareness. I know, however, that
right effort, in Pāli: sammā-vāyāma, is one of the factors of the
eightfold Path. What is the characteristic of right effort?

@emph{Nina:} Sammā-vāyāma or right effort is the cetasika which is effort or
energy, in Pāli: viriya. The Visuddhimagga (XIV, 137) states about
viriya:

Energy (viriya) is the state of one who is vigorous (vira). Its
characteristic is marshaling (driving). Its function is to consolidate
conascent states. It is manifested as non-collapse. Because of the
words ``Bestirred, he strives wisely'' (Anguttara Nikāya II,
115@footnote{Book of the Fours, Ch XII, par 3, The goad. The Buddha uses
a simile of horses which are stirred by a goad. Even so a person may be
stirred to develop right understanding. Some people are already stirred
when they hear about someone else who is ill or dead, while others are
stirred when they see it themselves, or when their own relatives are
ill or dead, or when they themselves suffer from painful feelings.})
its proximate cause is a sense of urgency; or its proximate cause is
grounds for the initiation of energy. When rightly initiated, it should
be regarded as the root of all attainments. 

Viriya is a type of nāma but is it not true that we take it for self?
There are different kinds of viriya. There is viriya which is akusala
and there is viriya which is kusala. There is viriya with dāna, viriya
with sīla, viriya in samatha and viriya in vipassanā, which is right
effort of the eightfold Path (sammā-vāyāma), and all these kinds of
viriya have different qualities. 

Sammā-vāyāma of the eightfold Path arises together with sammā-diṭṭhi,
right understanding and sammā-sati, right mindfulness. The development
of vipassanā is not merely being mindful of realities, without
investigating their characteristics. The characteristics of nāma and
rūpa must be thoroughly investigated over and over again until they are
understood as only a nāma or only a rūpa, non-self. Sammā-vāyāma is an
indispensable factor for the development of right understanding,
because much courage and perseverance are needed for the investigation
of realities in order see them as they are. Sammā-vāyāma is the
strength and vigour which arises each moment when there is awareness of
a nāma or a rūpa and understanding of the reality which appears is
being developed. 

@emph{Question:} You said that when sammā-diṭṭhi investigates a characteristic
of nāma or rūpa which is object of mindfulness there is also
sammā-vāyāma at that moment. But when there is very little awareness
should we not make an effort to have more?

@emph{Nina:} One may try to force the arising of awareness and try to ``catch''
the reality of the present moment, but then one does not know what sati
is. Someone may take his attachment to sati for sati. It is true that
right awareness can be developed, but this does not mean that one can
force its arising. The factor which can condition its arising is
understanding how vipassanā is to be developed. If we know what the
object of sati is: the nāma or rūpa which appears now, through one of
the six doors, sati can arise and thus right understanding can
gradually develop. When a citta with right mindfulness arises, there is
at that moment right effort as well. Effort in vipassanā is the
strength or energy which is needed to investigate the reality which
appears in order to understand it as it is, but we should remember that
this effort is not self. Right effort of the eightfold Path supports
and strengthens right mindfulness and right understanding. 

@emph{Question:} I have heard that the right effort of the eightfold Path is
the effort of the ``middle way''. However, it is very difficult to walk
the middle way. If we make too much of an effort there is the notion of
self again and if we make no effort at all we are lazy and heedless. I
do not know how to walk the right way. 

@emph{Nina:} If we think in terms of making too much or too little effort, then
we do not realize that effort is nāma and not self. We should not
confuse sammā-vāyāma of the eightfold Path with what we in conventional
language usually mean by ``effort'' or ``trying''. We do not have to think
of making an effort, because when there is right mindfulness there is
at that moment sammā-vāyāma as well. Sammā-vāyāma arises for example
when there is right mindfulness of seeing, hearing, thinking, visible
object or sound which appears now. At such a moment there is courage
and strength to be mindful of the reality which appears in order to
develop a clearer understanding of its characteristic.

@emph{Question:} When sati does not arise we cannot force its arising. Does
this mean that nothing else can be done but waiting for the arising of
sati?

@emph{Nina:} We should not waste our life and spend it in heedlessness. Thus,
we should not neglect any way of kusala for which there is an
opportunity. Dāna, sīla, samatha and vipassanā are different ways of
kusala we can apply ourselves to. When sati of vipassanā does not
arise, we should not be lazy with regard to the other ways of kusala,
because at the moments we do not develop kusala, we act, speak and
think with akusala cittas and thus we accumulate akusala time and
again.

We should not neglect the way of kusala which is studying and
considering the teachings. If we study the teachings and often consider
what the Buddha taught about nāma and rūpa there are conditions for the
arising of sati at any moment. 

@emph{Question:} When there are akusala cittas an effort should be made for
kusala cittas. The person who develops samatha and the person who
develops vipassanā will make an effort for kusala in different ways. Is
that right?

@emph{Nina:} Samatha is the development of calm by means of a suitable
meditation subject. The kusala citta which applies itself to samatha is
accompanied by right effort, sammā-vāyāma, but this kind of effort is
different from sammā-vāyāma of the eightfold Path. Sammā-vāyāma in
samatha supports the citta which develops calm in order to temporarily
eliminate akusala cittas. Sammā-vāyāma of the eightfold Path supports
the citta and the accompanying mental factors, when there is right
mindfulness of whatever reality appears, in order that it will be known
as it is, as non-self. When there is akusala citta, it can be realised
as a type of nāma, arising because of conditions, not self.

It is important to know what one is developing, samatha or vipassanā.
When people say that they develop vipassanā but do not want to be aware
of akusala cittas, they are not on the eightfold Path. Most people are
afraid of gross defilements, but does one realize the danger of latent
tendencies which have been accumulated? Latent tendencies are
dangerous; they are a condition for akusala cittas to arise; they are
the condition for us to be born again and again. Vipassanā is the only
way to eradicate all defilements and also the latent tendencies.
Therefore, vipassanā is the highest way of kusala. 

@emph{Question:} Are there many moments of mindfulness needed before there can
be a clear understanding of realities?

@emph{Nina:} In the beginning there cannot be a clear understanding of nāma and
rūpa. We often mention the words nāma and rūpa but we should keep in
mind that these words denote realities which can be known through
direct experience in our daily life. Seeing, hearing or thinking are
nāmas which can be directly known when they appear. Visible object,
sound or hardness are rūpas which can be directly known when they
appear. We still think of a self who sees, hears or thinks, but what we
take for a person are in fact many different elements which can be
known one at a time. Hearing is only an element, a type of nāma which
experiences sound. Hearing cannot experience any other object. Through
mindfulness of hearing when it appears we will learn that not a self
hears, but that hearing hears. When sound appears sound can be the
object of mindfulness; there is at that moment no thought of the sound
of a voice or the sound of a particular thing. When there is
mindfulness of sound, its characteristic can be investigated and this
is the way to know sound as it is: a rūpa which is experienced through
the ears, not a thing which belongs to a person, not a ``self''. Most of
the time there is forgetfulness of realities. At the moment sati arises
there is mindfulness of one reality at a time, a nāma-element or a
rūpa-element.

Right understanding of nāma and rūpa can only develop at the moment
there is mindfulness of their characteristics as they appear through
the six doorways. Each moment of developing right understanding is
extremely short, it arises and then falls away immediately. In the
beginning there will be only be a few moments of sati and then there
are bound to be countless moments of forgetfulness of realities. Many
moments of sati are needed in order that the characteristics of nāma
and rūpa can be investigated, but this should not make us discouraged.
A moment of right mindfulness is never lost, it conditions mindfulness
again, later on. It is unpredictable when sati will arise, because it
is anattā, non-self. The development of satipaṭṭhāna is the only way to
have less ignorance of realities. If we really see the danger of
ignorance it can be a condition for the arising of sati and then there
is right effort as well. 

It is important to know the difference between thinking about nāma and
rūpa and the paññā which directly knows the characteristic of the nāma
or rūpa which appears. We may think that we know nāma and rūpa from
direct experience, but is there a clear understanding of their
different characteristics? Do we know already through direct experience
the difference between the characteristic of nāma and the
characteristic of rūpa? We have learned that nāma is the reality which
experiences something and that rūpa is the reality which does not know
anything, but now we should know their different characteristics
through the direct experience, in being mindful of them. So long as
there is doubt about the difference between nāma and rūpa, there cannot
be a clear understanding of them. 

@emph{Question:} I think that I can experience the impermanence of seeing. I
know that it has fallen away when other phenomena appear. When, for
instance, there is hearing it is clear that seeing has fallen away.

@emph{Nina:} Knowing impermanence by way of thinking is not the same as the
direct understanding of the arising and falling away of realities. It
is difficult to realize this. During the time we call in conventional
language a ``moment'' there are countless cittas arising and falling
away, succeeding one another. If one has not cultivated right
understanding to a high degree the impermanence of cittas cannot be
realized.

@emph{Question:} I see that it is important to know impermanence through direct
experience in order to eliminate wrong understanding of realities. How
can I ever be quick enough to know the impermanence of cittas? 

@emph{Nina:} This can never be known so long as there a concept of self who
tries to take hold of realities. Only paññā can realize the nāma or
rūpa appearing at the present moment. 

@emph{Question:} What can be known by direct experience when one has only just
begun to develop insight?

@emph{Nina:} There can be mindfulness of a characteristic which appears through
one of the six doors. But there cannot yet be a precise knowledge of
nāma and rūpa. Someone told me that he assumed that everybody knew the
difference between nāma and rūpa; for example, between the nāma which
experiences sound, hearing, and the rūpa which is sound. He was
wondering how anybody could have doubts about it. However, we should
know the difference between theoretical knowledge and the paññā which
has direct understanding of realities. Only when paññā has been
developed in vipassanā can it have a precise knowledge of the reality
which appears at the present moment.

@emph{Question:} There are many phenomena arising at the same time. In what
order should I be aware of phenomena?

@emph{Nina:} It is true that there are many phenomena arising at the same time.
For example, our body consists of many different rūpas which arise and
fall away. The rūpas which are solidity, cohesion, temperature and
motion always arise together and fall away together. But only one
characteristic can be experienced by citta at a time, because citta can
have only one object at a time. Thus, when the citta is accompanied by
sammā-sati, right mindfulness, there can be mindfulness of only one
reality at a time. When we say that hardness appears or presents itself
it means that hardness is the object which citta experiences at that
moment. If sati accompanies the citta, then sati has the same object as
the citta; it is mindful of that object. When there is mindfulness of
the characteristic of hardness, paññā can realize it as only hardness;
it is not a body, not a self, it is only a kind of rūpa which is
experienced through the door of the body. It is beyond control what the
object of awareness will be. There is no rule which tells us of which
phenomena there should be awareness and in which order.

Direct understanding of realities by being mindful of them is not the
same as theoretical knowledge of them, but theoretical knowledge of
nāma and rūpa is a helpful foundation for the development of vipassanā.
When we read the suttas we notice that the Buddha spoke time and again
about understanding nāma and rūpa which appear through the six
doorways. We read for example in the Kindred Sayings (IV,
Salāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Third Fifty, Ch V, par 146,
Helpful) that the Buddha said to the monks:

@quotation
I will teach you, monks, a way that is helpful for nibbāna. Do you
listen to it. And what, monks, is that way? Herein, monks, a monk
regards the eye as impermanent. He regards objects, eye-consciousness,
eye-contact as impermanent. That pleasant, unpleasant or neutral
feeling experienced, which arises by eye-contact @minus{}that also he regards
as impermanent.

He regards the ear@dots{}the nose@dots{}the tongue@dots{}the body@dots{}He regards
mind, mind-states, mind-consciousness, mind-contact as impermanent. The
pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling or neutral feeling@dots{}arising
therefrom, he regards that also as impermanent.

This, monks, is the way that is helpful for nibbāna.

@end quotation

Would thinking about realities as impermanent lead to nibbāna? We cannot
become detached from the concept of self merely by thinking. Only the
paññā which directly understands the characteristics of nāma and rūpa
which appear at the present moment can see them as they really are, as
impermanent and non-self. 

If we mistakenly think that we know the truth already we are not able to
understand the real meaning of this sutta. Why would the Buddha time
and again stress that the eye, seeing-consciousness and visible object,
that all realities appearing through the six doors are impermanent? In
order to remind people to be aware of nāma and rūpa, so that one day
they would see realities as they are.

@emph{Question:} I find it difficult to know from direct experience the
difference between the nāma which experiences sound and the rūpa which
is sound. How can I ever know the difference between nāma and rūpa
unless I make an effort? Or would it be better in the beginning to
ignore the difference between nāma and rūpa, such as hearing and sound,
and rather know different characteristics of rūpa which appear through
the bodysense?

@emph{Nina:} All nāmas and rūpas which appear through the different doorways
should be known. We should not select any particular kind of nāma or
rūpa as object of awareness. That would not be the right path. Hearing
can be known and sound can be known as well, they are both realities
which each have a different characteristic. We cannot, however, have a
clear understanding of realities within just a short time. The
characteristics of nāma and rūpa are clearly distinguished from each
other when the first stage of insight-knowledge is attained. Even this
stage, which is only a beginning stage, cannot be attained unless there
has been mindfulness over and over again of nāma and rūpa. Could we say
that we know already different kinds of nāma and rūpa as they appear
through the different doorways? Are we no longer confused as to the
doorway through which an object is experienced? 

@emph{Question:} No, I certainly cannot say that.

@emph{Nina:} How could there be a precise knowledge of realities when their
characteristics are not yet known from direct experience, as they
appear one at a time through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and
mind-door? All these considerations help us to realize how little we
know. If we wrongly assume that we know realities as they are we cannot
develop right understanding. But when we see how little we know we are
more truthful and then we may be able to begin to develop right
understanding.

When right understanding develops we begin to realize the difference
between theoretical knowledge of realities and the paññā which directly
knows the characteristics of phenomena when they appear one at a time.
We realize that a few moments of awareness are not enough; that we need
to be mindful of nāma and rūpa countless times in order to become more
familiar with their characteristics. In that way a more precise
knowledge of nāma and rūpa can be developed.

@emph{Question:} In the Visuddhimagga, in the definition of effort, it is said
that its proximate cause is ``a sense of urgency'' or ``grounds for the
initiation of energy''. What can urge us to be mindful now?

@emph{Nina:} The Buddha pointed out that it is a matter of urgency for us to
develop right understanding of realities; he encouraged people to be
mindful, at any time and any place. He pointed out the sorrows of past
lives, of the present life and of the lives in the future which will
occur if one has not made an end to rebirth. 

In the Theragāthā (Vajjita, Canto II, 168) we read about Vajjita who
attained arahatship. The text states:
@example

A traveller I these long, long ages past,
And round about the realms of life I've whirled;
One of the many-folk and blind as they,
No ariyan truths had I the power to see.
But earnestly I strove for light and calm;
And now all shattered lies the endless way.
All future bournes abolished utterly,
Now comes never more rebirth for me.

@end example
We do not know how long we will be in this plane of existence nor
whether we will be able to develop insight in the next life. When we
read in the scriptures about birth, old age, sickness and death, and
about the dangers of rebirth, we can be reminded to be aware of
realities now, at this moment. When we see that mindfulness now is
urgent and that it should not be put off, it can help us to be less
neglectful.

Sammā-vāyāma, right effort, is an indispensable factor of the eightfold
Path; it supports and strengthens right understanding and right
mindfulness. One needs vigour and courage to be mindful without delay
and to consider and investigate the characteristics of nāma and rūpa
untiringly, so that right understanding can grow. Realities such as
seeing, visible object, hearing, sound, feeling or thinking appear
countless times during the day, yet often there is no mindfulness but
forgetfulness of realities. If there is no mindfulness now, will there
ever be the wisdom which sees things as they are?

@emph{Question:} You say that thinking about the dangers of rebirth will remind
people not to be heedless. I doubt whether it is helpful to be
frightened by the thought of hell.

@emph{Nina:} All of the Buddha's teachings are most valuable. That is why we
should continue reading the scriptures. For different situations in
life we will find in the teachings the right words which will encourage
us to be mindful. Often we are heedless and forgetful of realities, but
when we read about the danger of rebirth in hell it reminds us to
continue to develop right understanding. We should not be frightened by
the thought of hell @minus{}that is akusala. But we should remember that only
if vipassanā is developed and enlightenment is attained will we escape
the danger of an unhappy rebirth.

When we see the extent of the defilements we have accumulated and are
still accumulating, we can be urged to develop right understanding now,
at this moment.

@node Right Mindfulness
@chapter Right Mindfulness

@emph{Questioner:} The wisdom which sees realities as they are can only develop
when there is mindfulness. Is there anything we can do in order to have
mindfulness of nāma and rūpa, so that later on paññā which knows them
as they are will arise?

@emph{Nina:} If one wants to do something in particular in order to have
mindfulness, one is led by clinging and then paññā cannot develop. Some
people think that right mindfulness of the eightfold Path is something
other than attending to the characteristic of nāma or rūpa which
appears now, in daily life. That is the wrong understanding of
mindfulness. At this moment you are sitting. Is there hardness? Can you
experience it?

@emph{Question:} Yes, I can experience it.

@emph{Nina:} Hardness is only a kind of rūpa which appears through the
bodysense. We usually think of a thing or the body which is hard and we
are forgetful of the characteristic of hardness which appears. When
there is mindfulness of the characteristic of hardness which appears we
do not think of a thing or of the body which is hard and at that moment
paññā can investigate the reality which is hardness. In that way
hardness can be known as only a kind of rūpa which appears through the
bodysense, no ``self''. Hardness is an ultimate reality with its own
unchangeable characteristic which can be directly experienced without
the need to think about it or to name it ``hardness'' or ``rūpa''. Ultimate
realities are different from concepts which are not real in the
ultimate sense. When we think of a thing which is hard or the body
which is hard, the object of thinking is a concept. The thinking
itself, however, is an ultimate reality, a type of nāma. Anything which
is real, nāma and rūpa, are the objects of right mindfulness and right
understanding of the eightfold Path. The right understanding of
ultimate realities can eventually lead to detachment from the wrong
view of self. When a reality such as hardness appears, there is also a
reality which experiences hardness. It is not self who experiences
hardness, but a kind of nāma, different from the rūpa which is
hardness. The experience of hardness is an ultimate reality with its
own characteristic which can be object of mindfulness when it presents
itself, and then paññā can investigate it in order to know it as it is.
Thus, sati is not forgetful, but mindful of the characteristics of nāma
and rūpa as they appear one at a time through the six doors. At the
moment of mindfulness of a reality paññā can investigate it and in this
way it will eventually be known as it is. 

We may be inclined to think that we have to do something special in
order to have mindfulness and that we then can ``experience'' nāma and
rūpa as they are, but this is not so. Right understanding of what sati
is and what the object of sati is, namely an ultimate reality, can
condition the arising of sati and then paññā can gradually develop. In
order to know what sati is and what the object of sati we have to
listen to the good friend in Dhamma who can explain the development of
right understanding, we have to study the Dhamma and to consider it
carefully. 

Sammā-sati, right mindfulness, is one of the factors of the eightfold
Path and it arises together with sammā-diṭṭhi, right understanding.
Sammā-sati is mindful of a characteristic of nāma or rūpa 
and sammā-diṭṭhi realizes it as it is. 

@emph{Question:} But mindfulness has to be cultivated. Do we not have to do
certain things and abstain from other things we are used to doing in
daily life, in order to have more mindfulness?

@emph{Nina:} Studying the teachings, pondering over them, learning about the
right way of practice, knowing the benefit of right understanding,
these are conditions for the arising of mindfulness. When we have
understood that mindfulness arises because of conditions, that it is
anattā, non-self, and when we have found out for ourselves that we
cannot induce mindfulness, we will refrain from doing special things in
order to have more mindfulness.

@emph{Question:} I know what you mean. When I sit still at home and I try to be
mindful, I cannot be mindful.

@emph{Nina:} When there is right understanding, we realize that the aim of
vipassanā is knowing ourselves, our daily life. Therefore, we do not
act in a way which is unnatural to ourselves in order to have more
sati. We do not force ourselves to sit still for a long time and wait
for sati to arise. Is sitting still and doing nothing the natural thing
for you to do?

@emph{Question:} No, I usually read or write, or I stand up and walk around and
do many different things.

@emph{Nina:} So, if you want to know your daily life, should you force yourself
to do something which is not natural to you?

@emph{Question:} No, I see that I will know myself better if I do the things I
have accumulations for and which I am used to doing. However, I wonder
how we can know realities as they are since a moment of sati is
extremely short.

@emph{Nina:} A moment of sati is extremely short; it arises and falls away with
the citta. Sati is impermanent and non-self. Sati arises and falls
away, but it can arise again when there are conditions. Thus
characteristics of nāma and rūpa can gradually be known. If people do
not realize that sati arises because there are the right conditions for
its arising and if they try to induce it, they will not know what sati
is. In that case paññā cannot be developed. 

@emph{Question:} I notice that when I do good deeds mindfulness of nāma and
rūpa arises more often. Are good deeds a condition for mindfulness of
nāma and rūpa?

@emph{Nina:} Good deeds are beneficial and they are a condition to have less
akusala cittas, but we should not assume that there is necessarily more
mindfulness of nāma and rūpa while we perform them. The arising of sati
depends on conditions, and there is no self who can regulate its
arising. We should not mistakenly believe that there cannot be
awareness also of akusala cittas; after akusala citta has fallen away
citta with sati may arise and then also the reality which is akusala
can be object of mindfulness. The Buddha said that all kinds of
realities can be known as they are. Mindfulness should not be limited
to certain times, places or occasions. 

@emph{Question:} But is it not important for those who begin to develop
mindfulness to be in a special place?

@emph{Nina:} It is right understanding which is important. In vipassanā we come
to know six worlds the world appearing: 

@itemize

@item
through the eyes,

@item
through the ears, 

@item
through the nose,

@item
through the tongue, 

@item
through the bodysense,

@item
through the mind-door.

@end itemize

We should learn to distinguish between these six worlds in order to know
the truth. Only one ``world'' at a time is object of mindfulness. When we
think of a person, an animal or a tree, there is a concept of a ``whole''
and we do not distinguish between these six worlds. When there is
mindfulness of a reality such as visible object, which is the ``world
appearing through the eyes'', or hardness, which is the ``world appearing
through the bodysense'', we learn to understand the difference between
thinking of concepts and mindfulness of ultimate realities as they
appear one at a time. In order to develop right understanding of
realities we have to know the difference. The ``six worlds'' are
everywhere, no matter where we are; there should be mindfulness of nāma
and rūpa which are those six worlds, in order to know the truth.

@emph{Question:} In the beginning, when there is very little awareness, we are
likely to become impatient. We think that there never will be any
result. Would it not be helpful to be in a quiet place, such as a
meditation centre?

@emph{Nina:} When we begin to develop vipassanā we are anxious to have
immediate results. We want to experience nāma and rūpa as they are and
to eradicate defilements without delay. People may become tense in
their effort to control awareness and thus they deviate from the right
path. If they are on the wrong path they do not have right awareness
and can therefore not develop right understanding.

In vipassanā one develops right understanding of one's daily life. I
heard someone say that in vipassanā he is tearing himself away from
normal life. He calls his life without awareness his normal life and
his life with awareness his ``meditation life''. If we separate
mindfulness from our daily life and consider it as something apart from
it we are not on the eightfold Path.

For many of us it is difficult to see that the eightfold Path is the
development of understanding of our daily life. The eightfold Path is
the ``middle way''. When our understanding is more developed we will
realize what the middle way is. Walking the middle way means not
forcing ourselves to things for which we have no accumulations. If we
have no accumulations for a secluded life it is clear that such a life
is not our real life, and thus we should not force ourselves to it on
the assumption that paññā will develop more quickly. There is no self
who could hasten the development of paññā .

@emph{Question:} I still think that there are certain conditions which are not
favourable to the development of mindfulness and which should be
avoided. For example, reading books such as novels. If we read books
which are not about Dhamma and which do not contribute to the
improvement of society, the reading is not helpful for the arising of
kusala cittas. Should we not stop reading books like that if we want to
have more awareness?

@emph{Nina:} When we read books which are not helpful for kusala it shows that
we have accumulations for reading them. It would be wrong to assume
that in order to be mindful we should stop reading them; this would not
help us to know ourselves and it would make us believe that we have no
more akusala cittas. Not our desire to control sati but right
understanding of what the object of sati is can condition its arising.
Whatever reality appears, no matter whether it is pleasant or
unpleasant, kusala or akusala, can be the object of sati. When there is
awareness of the nāma and rūpa which appear while we are reading we are
on the middle way; we are on the way to know ourselves better. There
can be awareness of seeing as a type of nāma; of knowing the meaning of
what we read as another type of nāma. We may be absorbed in what we
read and like or dislike may arise; these are different types of nāma
again. Many types of nāma and rūpa may appear while we are reading. If
there is mindfulness of what appears at the present moment, also while
we are reading, there will be less attachment to the concept of self.

If we have accumulations for music or for painting we should not
suppress them in order to have more mindfulness. While we play music or
while we paint, nāma and rūpa appear through the six doors. Why can
there not be mindfulness of them? In this way we will understand that
our life consists of nāma and rūpa. We do not have to go to a secluded
place in order to look for nāma and rūpa; they appear already.

@emph{Question:} But if we read unwholesome literature or take alcoholic drinks
will it not hinder awareness? I doubt whether it is the middle way to
give in to these things. It seems that there are then more akusala
cittas instead of less. 

@emph{Nina:} Akusala cittas are bound to arise but sati can be mindful of the
akusala citta. At the moment of mindfulness there is kusala citta
instead of akusala citta. It is sati which can prevent us from
unwholesome courses of action (akusala kamma patha) through body,
speech and mind. We can learn that even a moment of mindfulness, be it
only a short moment, is very valuable, that it bears great fruit,
because during that moment right understanding is being developed. We
will have less ignorance of our defilements; we will learn that they
are types of nāma which arise because of conditions. 

Someone who has developed paññā to the degree that it can realize nāma
and rūpa as they really are could become a sotāpanna (streamwinner)
even shortly after akusala citta appeared. When insight has been highly
developed it can know any reality which appears as it is, even if it is
akusala. Paññā can understand whatever reality appears as impermanent,
dukkha and anattā. But only one of these three characteristics can be
known at a time. Wisdom is developed in daily life and enlightenment
can occur in daily life.

When we have learned from our own experience that the middle way which
the Buddha taught is the only way leading to the end of defilements,
our confidence in his teachings will increase all the time. We should
not be afraid to be mindful of realities in daily life. Then we will
know ourselves more and more until finally there will be no doubt that
what we used to take for self are only nāma and rūpa.

@emph{Question:} Sati has to be developed in daily life. But when I think of
the day which has passed and I realize how little mindfulness there has
been, I cannot help regretting the time I wasted. I know regret is
unwholesome, but what can I do about it?

@emph{Nina:} People would like to have a great deal of sati but they do not
realize for what purpose they want it. Our aim should not be just
awareness, without developing understanding, but it should be: to see
realities as they are. At the very moment of awareness of the reality
which appears paññā can investigate its characteristic so that
eventually nāma and rūpa can be known as impermanent and non-self. 

If the reality of the present moment is regret there can be awareness of
that characteristic and it can be understood as it is: only a type of
nāma which is conditioned. You will realize that all phenomena which
arise, sati included, arise because of conditions and that it is of no
use to regret the lack of sati. Then there will be less regret. 

@emph{Question:} Must sati always experience an object? I have heard people say
that when sati is more developed it does not experience an object; that
there is just stillness and peace.

@emph{Nina:} Sati must experience an object. Sati is a sobhana cetasika
(beautiful mental factor) arising with a sobhana citta. Each citta must
experience an object and the cetasikas arising with the citta
experience that object as well. Sati in samatha experiences an object;
it experiences the same object as the citta it accompanies, that is: a
meditation subject which can condition calm. Sati in vipassanā
experiences an object; it experiences the same object as the citta it
accompanies, that is, a nāma or a rūpa appearing at the present moment.

Most people like to have tranquillity and peace of mind. For what
purpose do they want it? Deep in their hearts they do not want to know
themselves, they just want tranquillity; they cling to a concept of
tranquillity. What is peace of mind or tranquillity? There should be a
precise understanding of its characteristic. There is peace or calm
with every kusala citta. When one is generous or one abstains from
unwholesome deeds or speech there is calm. In samatha one can develop a
higher degree of calm, but through samatha defilements are not
eradicated. There is calm also with the kusala citta which develops
vipassanā. But the aim of vipassanā is not the calm which is temporary
freedom from defilements; the aim is the development of right
understanding of realities. Through right understanding the wrong view
of self and eventually all defilements can be eradicated. We should
know the difference between the way of development and aim of samatha
and of vipassanā. Vipassanā is a kind of wisdom, it is the wisdom which
knows things as they are. 

@emph{Question:} The Buddha said that mindfulness should be cultivated at any
time, even just before we fall asleep. We read in the
Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 10@footnote{I have
used the translation of the Wheel Publication no. 19, Buddhist
Publication Society, Sri Lanka.} ) that the Buddha said to the monks:

And further, monks, a monk, in going forward and back, applies clear
comprehension; in looking straight on and looking away, he applies
clear comprehension; in bending and in stretching, he applies clear
comprehension; in wearing robes and carrying the bowl, he applies clear
comprehension; in eating, drinking, chewing and savouring, he applies
clear comprehension; in attending to the calls of nature, he applies
clear comprehension; in walking, in standing, in sitting, in falling
asleep, in waking, in speaking and in keeping silence, he applies clear
comprehension. Thus he lives contemplating the body in the body@enddots{}

Can there be mindfulness while we are falling asleep? When we are in
deep sleep and not dreaming there are bhavanga-cittas
(life-continuum), cittas which do not experience an object impinging on
one of the six doors@footnote{Bhavanga-cittas arise in between the
processes of cittas which experience an object through one of the six
doors, they keep the continuity in the lifespan of a being.}. When we
are dreaming there can be kusala cittas, but mostly there are akusala
cittas. 

@emph{Nina:} If mindfulness has been developed there can be mindfulness just
before we fall asleep. If there is no sati, there may be attachment, we
are pleased to be comfortably lying down. Or perhaps we are worrying
about many things which have happened during the day and thus aversion,
dosa, arises. If there is mindfulness of the realities which appear
just before we fall asleep, there are conditions for mindfulness as
soon as we wake up. When we fall asleep we do not know whether we will
wake up again. Death can come at any time. If we develop right
understanding of realities in daily life, no matter what we are doing,
there are conditions for mindfulness shortly before death. The cittas
arising shortly before death condition the rebirth-consciousness of the
next life. The sutta can remind us to development mindfulness of nāma
and rūpa at any moment, even just before we fall asleep. 

@emph{Question:} The Buddha said that there should be mindfulness when speaking
and mindfulness when keeping silence. I find it very difficult to be
mindful when talking to other people.

@emph{Nina:} We may think that we cannot be aware in such situations when we
still assume that in order to be aware we have to do something special.
When you are walking, are there no realities appearing?

@emph{Question:} Yes, there is for example the characteristic of hardness which
may appear, or the characteristic of motion or pressure.

@emph{Nina:} When you are talking is there no hardness, no motion?

@emph{Question:} Yes, there is.

@emph{Nina:} Can there not be hearing, seeing and thinking too when you are
talking? Do you have to stop talking in order to notice that there is
sound?

@emph{Question:} No, it can be noticed while one is talking.

@emph{Nina:} Can there not, while you are speaking, be awareness of sound, and
can it not be known as only sound, a kind of rūpa? While we are
speaking there are many different realities appearing at different
moments. We do not have to stop speaking in order to be aware. When we
are talking in a way which is not wholesome, when we are laughing and
enjoying ourselves, we may think that we cannot be aware. But all
realities are nāma and rūpa. Why can there not be awareness of them?

When you are in your office, do you often use the telephone? Are you
mindful when you pick up the receiver and speak?

@emph{Question:} When the telephone rings and I lift up the receiver there are
so many things happening one after the other. It is difficult to be
mindful in the office. 

@emph{Nina:} Are there no realities appearing through the six doors? You cannot
be mindful all the time, but if you have right understanding of what
sati is and what the object of sati, it may sometimes arise, even when
you are in your office. There may be mindfulness when you take up the
receiver and start to speak; then you may become absorbed in what you
want to say and there is forgetfulness instead of sati. But even if
there are only a few moments of sati, they can condition the arising of
sati again, later on. Sati can only be gradually accumulated. 

@emph{Question:} Some people think that when mindfulness has not yet been
established it is necessary to be alone in order to cultivate it. Is
that right?

@emph{Nina:} When there is mindfulness of a characteristic of nāma or rūpa we
are actually alone, because at that moment we are not attached to
``someone'' or ``something''. There are no people, only nāma and rūpa.
Being alone in this sense has nothing to do with the place where we
are. We do not have to break off our activities in order to be aware,
because any reality appearing through one of the six doors can be the
object of mindfulness. Even when we are with many people we can be
``alone'' with nāma and rūpa. When there is mindfulness of nāma and rūpa
we will see that what we take for a ``person'' are only nāma and rūpa. If
we were to go to a secluded place in order to be aware we might not be
``alone'' at all, we might instead be attached.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Salāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, Second Fifty, Ch II, par 63, By Migajāla):

@quotation
At Sāvatthī was the occasion (for this discourse)@dots{}

Then the venerable Migajāla came to see the Exalted One@dots{}Seated at one
side he thus addressed the Exalted One: 

`` 'Dwelling alone! Dwelling alone!' Lord, is the saying. Pray, lord, to
what extent is one a dweller alone, and to what extent is one a dweller
with a mate?''

``There are, Migajāla, objects cognizable by the eye, objects desirable,
pleasant, delightful and dear, passion-fraught, inciting to lust. If a
monk be enamoured of them, if he welcome them, if he persist in
clinging to them, so enamoured, so persisting in clinging to them,
there comes a lure upon him. Where there is a lure there is
infatuation. Where there is infatuation there is bondage. Bound in the
bondage of the lure, Migajāla, a monk is called 'dweller with a
mate'@enddots{}

A monk so dwelling, Migajāla, though he frequent jungle glades,
hermitages and lodgings in the forest, remote from sound, remote from
uproar, free from the breath of crowds, where one lodges far from human
kind, places suitable for solitude @minus{}yet is he called 'dweller with a
mate.'

Why so? Craving is the mate he has not left behind. Therefore is he
called 'dweller with a mate.'

But, Migajāla, there are objects cognizable by the eye, desirable,
pleasant, delightful and dear, passion-fraught, inciting to lust. If a
monk be not enamoured of them@dots{}the lure fades away. Where there is no
lure, there is no infatuation. Where there is no infatuation, there is
no bondage. Freed from the bondage of the lure, Migajāla, a monk is
called 'dweller alone'@dots{}

Thus dwelling, Migajāla, a monk, though he dwell amid a village crowded
with monks and nuns, with laymen and women lay-followers, with rājahs
and royal ministers, with sectarians and their followers @minus{}yet is he
called 'dweller alone'. Why so? Craving is the mate he has left behind.
Therefore is he called 'dweller alone'.''

@end quotation


@node Right Concentration
@chapter Right Concentration

@emph{Questioner:} Right concentration, sammā-samādhi, is one of the factors of
the eightfold Path. There is concentration in samatha and there is
concentration in vipassanā. What is concentration in vipassanā?

@emph{Nina:} Samādhi is a cetasika, mental factor, which is one-pointedness or
concentration, ekaggatā cetasika. Each citta can experience only one
object and the function of ekaggatā cetasika, which is also called
samādhi, is to focus on that one object. 

Each citta is accompanied by ekaggatā cetasika or samādhi, but since
there are many kinds of citta there are also many kinds of samādhi.
When samādhi accompanies akusala citta it is also akusala and when it
accompanies kusala citta it is also kusala.

There is sammā-samādhi or right concentration in samatha. It focuses on
one object: on the meditation subject which conditions calm. There are
many degrees of right concentration in samatha. As calm develops and
higher stages of calm are attained, concentration also develops. 

There is sammā-samādhi in vipassanā. The sammā-samādhi of the eightfold
Path arises together with sammā-diṭṭhi, right understanding, and
sammā-sati, right mindfulness. Its object is the reality which appears
through one of the six doors.

@emph{Question:} Thus, sammā-samādhi focuses on the nāma or rūpa which is the
object of mindfulness. It seems that we have to concentrate for some
time on nāma or rūpa; but in that way there could not be mindfulness
during our daily activities. 

@emph{Nina:} One-pointedness on the nāma or rūpa which appears does not mean
concentration for a period of time. Sammā-samādhi of the eightfold Path
arises with right mindfulness and right understanding which
investigates a characteristic of nāma or rūpa. It arises and falls away
together with the citta it accompanies. In vipassanā one does not try
to concentrate for some time on the reality which appears. 

The development of vipassanā does not interfere with our daily
activities; whatever nāma or rūpa appears in our daily life can be
object of mindfulness. Is there no seeing now, or hearing now? They can
be object of mindfulness. When we are talking to other people, there
are nāma and rūpa appearing through the six doors. Why can there not be
mindfulness of them? We do not have to stop talking when there is
mindfulness of a nāma or rūpa which appears. Sati can be a condition to
speak with kusala cittas instead of akusala cittas.

@emph{Question:} What should I do to understand the nāma or rūpa which appears
at the present moment? There is mindfulness in my daily life, but there
is not yet clear understanding of the nāmas and rūpas which appear. It
seems to me that there can be mindfulness also without knowing
characteristics of nāma and rūpa. Is that right?

@emph{Nina:} When we begin with the development of the eightfold Path there is
not yet a clear understanding of the nāma or rūpa which is the object
of mindfulness. Moreover, there are many degrees of understanding. The
understanding is bound to be very vague in the beginning, but, if there
is mindfulness of nāma and rūpa more often, there will be a more
precise understanding of their characteristics. 

In vipassanā you do not have to do anything special in order to develop
right understanding of the reality which appears, such as trying to
concentrate on it. When there are conditions for right mindfulness it
arises, and at that moment right understanding can investigate the
characteristic of the reality which appears; and there is also right
concentration which focuses on that reality. We should not forget,
however, that right understanding cannot be developed within a short
time, and thus a great deal of patience is needed for its development. 

@emph{Question:} Some people say that in order to develop vipassanā there must
be the development of samatha as a foundation. They think that when
concentration is developed in samatha it can help with the development
of insight.

@emph{Nina:} Samatha is the development of calm which is temporary freedom from
defilements. There are sati and paññā also in samatha but these are
different from sati and paññā in vipassanā and they have a different
object. The way of development of samatha is different from the way of
development of vipassanā and they each have a different aim. In samatha
the object of sati and paññā is a meditation subject which can
condition calm; in samatha one does not learn to see the nāmas and
rūpas which appear as they are and thus detachment from the concept of
self cannot be realized. 

People may be inclined to think that they should develop samatha before
they develop vipassanā in order to accumulate a great deal of sati, but
they should remember that sati in samatha is different from sati in
vipassanā. The aim of the development of vipassanā should be from the
beginning understanding, understanding realities as they are, as
impermanent, dukkha and non-self. This can only be achieved through
mindfulness of the nāma or rūpa which appears now, at this moment. 

@emph{Question:} In the case of nervous people would it not be better to
develop at least some degree of samatha before they develop vipassanā? 

@emph{Nina:} If one has accumulations for samatha one can develop it, but
through samatha one does not learn to be mindful of the nāmas and rūpas
which appear now, one at a time, in order to know them as non-self. How
could samatha then be a necessary condition for vipassanā? 

There are no rules as to the types of kusala someone should develop,
because this depends on his accumulations. If nervous people were to
study the Buddha's teachings and practise what he taught, they would
gain more understanding of the phenomena of their lives. This
understanding would help them effectively. 

@emph{Question:} I have heard people say that someone who is restless should
not study the Buddha's teachings because it would make him more
confused. He should just practise, not study.

@emph{Nina:} Everyone is confused before he listens to the teaching of the
Dhamma and studies it. We all have ignorance; because of ignorance we
are still in the cycle of birth and death. We have eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, bodysense and mind; we have lobha, attachment, dosa, aversion,
and moha, ignorance, arising on account of what we experience through
the senses and through the mind-door. But so long as we are ignorant we
do not know about these realities.

However, in studying the teachings and pondering over them we begin to
have more understanding of our life. Could a clearer understanding make
us confused? Moreover, how could one practise without study? If we
were to develop vipassanā without studying we would not know what the
right path is and what the wrong path. When people do not know the
characteristic of sammā-sati of the eightfold Path, they would
mistakenly think that sati can be induced, they would not know that
sati is anattā, non-self. The result would be that they become more
attached to the idea of self, instead of less attached. They may
believe that they can exert control over realities, that they can
experience nāma and rūpa as they are, that they can experience their
arising and falling away, whereas in reality they do not know anything.
We should remember that studying the teachings is a necessary condition
for the development of the eightfold Path.

@emph{Question:} But should those who are just beginning to develop mindfulness
not go to a special place such as a meditation centre where there is
peace and quiet? Most people are so busy in their daily lives that it
is impossible for them to be aware. In a meditation centre they can
really set their mind on being aware and they can concentrate on nāma
and rūpa. 

@emph{Nina:} The idea of going to a meditation centre in order to set one's
mind on being aware is motivated by the wrong view of self who can
control realities. A centre can be useful if one receives instruction
in the Dhamma, but one should not believe that one must go to a centre
in order to have more mindfulness. In the centre there may be
attachment to tranquillity and this is akusala, thus not helpful. One
may become more and more attached to tranquillity. When calm is
disturbed there are conditions for dosa. When people return to daily
life they find that they cannot be mindful, because daily life is not
tranquil. Some people think that they are ``in meditation'' while they
are in the centre and that they are ``out of meditation'' when they are
leading their ordinary, daily life. 

In the development of vipassanā there is no question of ``in meditation''
or ``out of meditation''. There are nāma and rūpa no matter where we are.
Seeing now is not different from seeing in a meditation centre; seeing
is always seeing, it experiences visible object everywhere. Hardness
which appears now is not different from hardness in a meditation
centre; it is a kind of rūpa which can be experienced through the
bodysense. Right understanding of mindfulness of the eightfold Path is
the condition for its arising in any place, at any time.

@emph{Question:} I have heard people say that someone who begins to develop
vipassanā should be slow in all his movements, he should also eat and
walk slowly, in order to have more mindfulness.

@emph{Nina:} When you move your arm slowly in order to have more mindfulness,
what types of citta motivate the movement? Is there desire?

@emph{Question:} Yes, there is desire for sati. 

@emph{Nina:} Thus there are cittas rooted in attachment, lobha-mūla-cittas. At
such moments one thinks of the awareness one wishes to have, of what
has not appeared yet. One is clinging to what may arise in the future
instead of attending to the present moment. One may be ignorant and
forgetful of the desire which has arisen and when seeing or hearing
appears there is no mindfulness of them either. Thus there will not be
detachment from the concept of self.

When one eats slowly in order to have more sati there is again clinging
to sati instead of right mindfulness. When we are eating, defilements
are bound to arise since we have not eradicated them. There can be like
or dislike of the food we are eating, but there can be mindfulness of
like and dislike so that they can be known as conditioned nāmas. No
matter whether we are doing things quickly or slowly, realities are
appearing through the six doors and sati can perform its function of
being mindful of them. Also when we are walking quickly hardness, for
example, may appear and it can be object of mindfulness. 

We should not forget the second noble Truth: craving is the origin of
dukkha. So long as there is clinging to nāma and rūpa there will be
rebirth and thus no end to dukkha. When we in the development of
vipassanā cling to results, we forget the second noble Truth. For
instance, we may want to know within a short time the difference
between nāma and rūpa, such as the difference between seeing and
visible object, hearing and sound; or we may wish to experience the
arising and falling away of nāma and rūpa. But so long as we cling to
obtaining the results of the development of insight, there is no way to
come to know the truth. The eightfold Path cannot be developed within a
short time. In order to become detached from the concept of self a
precise understanding of the different nāmas and rūpas which appear has
to be developed.

@emph{Question:} When there is more mindfulness there is more peacefulness too.
I am inclined to be contented with peacefulness and not to develop a
keener knowledge of realities.

@emph{Nina:} When there is mindfulness one is at that moment removed from
akusala and thus there is peace. There is also calm in the development
of vipassanā. There are many degrees of calm or peace. When one has
become an arahat one is freed from defilements forever. Then one has
attained true peace. 

One may be attached to calm which arises when there is sati. This kind
of attachment is a reality which can also be known when it appears: it
is only a type of nāma. We can see how deeply rooted defilements are:
if there is lack of sati one regrets the lack of sati, but when sati
arises one is attached to it. Awareness of all kinds of realities is
essential in order to become detached from the concept of self. If one
is glad that mindfulness arises one should not think that one has
reached the goal. Right understanding is the aim and thus one should
persevere in the development of a keener knowledge of the
characteristics of nāma and rūpa.

@emph{Question:} In the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta (Middle Length Sayings I, 10), it
appears that meditation subjects of samatha are also included in the
four Applications of Mindfulness. For example, meditation subjects such
as mindfulness of breath, meditations on corpses and on the
repulsiveness of the body are included in ``Mindfulness of the Body''.
Why are the objects of samatha and of vipassanā not separated? I
thought that we should not confuse these two ways of mental
development. 

@emph{Nina:} Samatha and vipassanā are different ways of mental development and
they each have a different aim, as we have seen. When one reads the
scriptures one will come across texts on the development of right
concentration which has reached the stage of absorption, jhāna. This
does not imply that all people should develop calm to the degree of
jhāna. We read in the scriptures about monks who led a secluded life,
developed jhāna and later on attained enlightenment. They developed
jhāna because they had accumulated the skill and the inclinations to do
so. Before the Buddha's enlightenment and his teaching of Dhamma,
samatha was the highest way of kusala. However, those who developed
jhāna and then attained enlightenment could not have attained it
without having developed vipassanā as well. Some people in the Buddha's
time developed both jhāna and vipassanā and then attained
enlightenment, but there were also many people who developed vipassanā
and attained enlightenment without having developed a high degree of
calm first. The Buddha did not set any rules with regard to samatha as
a necessary preparation for the development of vipassanā. The Buddha
encouraged those who could develop calm to the degree of jhāna to be
mindful of realities in order to see also jhāna as non-self. However,
we should remember that the attainment of jhāna is extremely difficult
and that only very few people can attain it. Someone who has
accumulated the skill and inclination to develop samatha to the degree
of jhāna, has to know the right conditions for jhāna and he has to know
which factors can obstruct it. He has to be aware of his cittas in
order to know whether the jhāna-factors have been developed to the
degree that jhāna can be attained. If he is not attached to jhāna he
can, after the jhānacittas have fallen away, develop right
understanding of whatever reality appears. Also jhānacitta can be
object of mindfulness, it can be realized as non-self. Anything which
is real and which appears can be object of mindfulness.

Out of his great compassion the Buddha spoke about everything which is
real. He knew the different accumulations of people and thus he used
many different ways of explaining the truth and he taught all kinds of
wholesomeness. It depends on someone's accumulations which type of
kusala citta arises at a particular moment: there may be kusala cittas
which ponder over the true nature of realities, or kusala cittas with a
higher degree of calm, even to the degree of jhāna, or there may be
kusala cittas with mindfulness of nāma and rūpa, or even lokuttara
cittas which experience nibbāna. 

Mindfulness of breathing and other objects which are among the
meditation subjects of samatha are included in the ``Application of
Mindfulness of the Body'', because they can also be objects of
mindfulness in vipassanā. In the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta, after the section
on mindfulness of breathing, the section on the repulsiveness of the
body, the section on meditations on corpses and after each of the other
sections, we read that one should contemplate the origination-factors
and the dissolution-factors in the body. In order to understand the
meaning of this sutta we should not overlook these sentences. The
contemplation of the origination and dissolution of phenomena is not
merely thinking about them, it is contemplation through insight. The
aim of the four Applications of Mindfulness is not calm which is only
temporary but the wisdom which can eradicate defilements. This wisdom,
insight, can only be developed through mindfulness of whatever reality
appears now. 

All the objects included in the four Applications of Mindfulness can
remind us of the true nature of reality, of impermanence, dukkha and
anattā. They can exhort us to be mindful of what appears now. The
meditations on corpses can for some people condition calm, and for
those who have accumulated skill for jhāna, even calm to the degree of
jhāna, it all depends on the individual. However, in order to eradicate
defilements, also the person who has attained jhāna should develop
insight; he should with insight contemplate the origination and
dissolution of realities@footnote{For such a person jhāna is then the
``proximate cause'' for insight (Vis. XI, 121).}. The person who
develops both jhāna and insight and the person who develops insight
alone should be aware of whatever reality appears in order to eradicate
wrong view and all defilements. We read in the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta, at
the end of each of the meditations on corpses, that the monk should
reflect as follows: ``Verily, this body of mine too is of the same
nature as that body, is going to be like that body, and has not got
past the condition of becoming like that body.'' Also for those who have
no inclination to develop jhāna subjects such as meditations on corpses
can be objects of mindfulness in vipassanā: when they see a dead person
or a dead animal, they can be reminded of the impermanence of their own
body. At such a moment mindfulness of whatever reality appears can
arise. We may not have accumulations to reflect on corpses, but we can
still think of the shortness of life and this can help us to have less
attachment and aversion and not to waste opportunities for the
development of right understanding of nāma and rūpa. 

There are many moments of forgetfulness of realities but we can be
reminded of the true nature of realities by the things we perceive in
our daily life. The ``Repulsiveness of the Body'', for example, which is
classified under Mindfulness of the Body, can remind us to be aware. In
our daily life we can notice ``parts of the body'', such as hair, nails,
teeth and skin. Is it not true that they are loathsome? Are they not
subject to decay? They can remind us of the true nature of phenomena.
When we reflect on the truth there may be moments of calm, but are we
contented to have only the calm which is temporary freedom from
akusala? If our aim is the development of right understanding and if we
do not cling to calm there can be mindfulness of whatever reality
appears. Everything in our life can urge us to be mindful of the nāma
or rūpa which appears now. When we look into a mirror and notice that
we are becoming older it can remind us of the true nature of the body.
What we take for ``my body'' are only elements which are impermanent and
not self. Are there not many things in our life which are ugly or
unpleasant, such as, for example, our own or others' bad breath?
Repulsiveness and decay both in ourselves and in others can lead us to
the most useful thing in life: to the development of right
understanding of realities.

The Buddha spoke about everything which is real, because the objects
which can remind us to be aware of the present moment are different for
each of us, as we all have different accumulations. It depends on the
accumulated conditions what type of citta arises at a particular
moment. It may be a citta with calm reflecting on impermanence, a citta
with calm to the degree of jhāna, experiencing a meditation subject
with absorption, or a citta with mindfulness of the present reality. We
cannot force ourselves to have a particular citta, then we are led by
clinging to the concept of self. Thus, there is no rule which kind of
kusala should be developed at a particular moment. Insight can be
developed of the realities which naturally arise in our life. 

Everything within us and around us can remind us to be aware now.
Reflections on our own accumulations can lead us to awareness of the
present moment too. We may notice how deeply rooted clinging is; we
have accumulated it in countless lives. Do we wish to continue
accumulating clinging or do we want to walk the way leading to the end
of clinging? Even our akusala cittas can remind us to be aware of the
present moment.

Sometimes we may notice that others have akusala cittas; we may notice
their attachment, anxiety, ignorance and doubt. Or we may notice that
they have kusala cittas with generosity and compassion. The cittas of
others are also included in the four Applications of Mindfulness, in
the section on mindfulness of citta. They can remind us of reality and
thus they can be the condition for the arising of sati. Sati can then
be aware of whatever nāma or rūpa appears. 

There is not any reality which is excluded from the Applications of
Mindfulness. We do not have to do complicated things in order to
develop the eightfold Path. That which is closest to ourselves, the
realities within ourselves and around ourselves in daily life, can be
the object of mindfulness at any time. Anything in the world can urge
us to develop the eightfold Path, until the goal is reached: the
eradication of lobha, dosa and moha. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book I, Kindred Sayings
on the Way, Ch II, par 9) that in Pāṭaliputta the venerable Bhadda came
to see Ānanda and said to him:

@quotation

`` 'The righteous life, the righteous life!' is the saying, friend
Ānanda. Pray, friend, what is the righteous life, and in what
does it end?''

``Well said, well said, friend Bhadda@dots{}Well, friend, it is just that
ariyan eightfold way, namely: Right understanding, right thinking,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness and right concentration. The destruction of lust, the
destruction of hatred, the destruction of illusion, friend, that is
what this righteous life ends in.''

@end quotation

@node The Highest Blessings
@chapter The Highest Blessings

In the Mahā-Maṅgala-sutta (The Highest Blessings, Sutta-Nipāta II,
4, vs. 258 @minus{}270, Khuddaka Nikāya)@footnote{I am using the translation
by Walpola Rahula, in ``What the Buddha taught''. The P.T.S. translation
is by K.R. Norman.} we read that a deva came to see the Buddha when he
was staying at Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery at the Jeta Grove,
and asked him what the highest blessing was. In reply the Buddha spoke
to him about the highest blessings. All the blessings of a life full of
Dhamma are to be found in this sutta. We read that the Buddha said:

@itemize 

@item
Not to associate with fools, to associate with the wise, and to honour
those who are worthy of honour @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
To reside in a suitable locality, to have done meritorious actions in
the past, and to set oneself in the right course @minus{}this is the Highest
Blessing.

@item
Vast learning, (skill in) handicraft, a highly trained discipline, and
pleasant speech @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
Supporting one's mother and father, cherishing wife and children, and
peaceful occupations @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
Liberality, righteous conduct, the helping of relatives, and blameless
actions @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing. 

@item
To cease and abstain from evil, abstention from intoxicating drinks, and
diligence in virtue @minus{} this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
Reverence, humility, contentment, gratitude and the opportune hearing of
the Dhamma @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
Patience, obedience, seeing the Samanas (holy men), and (taking part in)
religious discussions at proper times @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
Self-control, Holy Life, perception of the Noble Truths, and the
realisation of Nibbāna @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
If a man's mind is sorrowless, stainless, and secure, and does not shake
when touched by worldly vicissitudes @minus{}this is the Highest Blessing.

@item
Those who thus acting are everywhere unconquered, attain happiness
everywhere to them these are the Highest Blessings.
@end itemize

``Not to associate with fools, to associate with the wise, and to honour
those who are worthy of honour'' is the first blessing. The last
blessing, which is the blessing of the arahat, cannot be attained if
one lacks the first blessing. If one does not know the right conditions
for enlightenment, nibbāna cannot be realized. We read in the Kindred
Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book XI, Kindred Sayings on Streamwinning, Ch
I, par 5) that the Buddha asked Sāriputta to tell him what the conditions
are for ``stream-winning'', the attainment of the first stage of
enlightenment. We read that Sāriputta answered:

``Lord, association with the upright is a limb of stream-winning. Hearing
the good Dhamma is a limb of stream-winning. Applying the mind is a
limb of stream-winning. Conforming to the Dhamma is a limb of
stream-winning.``

Conforming to the Dhamma is applying the Dhamma, practising it. We
cannot hear the Dhamma, investigate the truth of it and practise it,
unless we have met the right person who can point out to us the meaning
of the Buddha's teachings and the way to practise them. 

Do we want to associate with foolish people or with wise people? It is
of no use to apply ourselves to mental development if we do not
scrutinise ourselves first with regard to this question. We are
inclined to associate with people who have the same ideas and who like
or dislike the same things as we ourselves. In the Kindred Sayings (II,
Nidāna-vagga, Ch XIV, Kindred Sayings on Elements, par 14) it is said
that ``through an element'' beings come together. In the teachings
realities are sometimes called ``elements'' (dhātu). An element is an
ultimate reality which has its own characteristic. Elements are devoid
of self. Our accumulated inclinations are like elements; the same
elements attract each other. We read: 

Through an element it is, monks, that beings flow together, meet
together. Beings of low tastes flow together, meet together with them
of low tastes. They of virtuous tastes flow together, meet together
with them of virtuous tastes. So have they done in the past. So will
they do in the future. So do they now in the present.

When we are together with someone for a long time we cannot help being
influenced by him. If we have foolish friends who do not know the value
of kusala, who act and speak in an unwholesome way, it is to our
decline. We may not notice that we are under their influence, but
gradually we may find ourselves following their ways. If we have
friends who know the value of kusala, who are generous, perform good
deeds and speak in a wholesome way, it encourages us to more
wholesomeness. The Buddha pointed out the dangers of wrong friendship
and the benefit of righteous friendship. 

Fools do not know what is wholesome and what is unwholesome. They praise
what should not be praised and do not honour to those who should be
honoured. For example, high esteem is given to the most beautiful woman
in the country or the world, or to persons who have the greatest skill
in the field of sports, or to the best actor or musician. Should we
disapprove of people who have beauty, strength or skill? We cannot
force ourselves not to admire them, but if we have right understanding
of kusala and akusala, we will know whether it is wholesome or
unwholesome to be attached to beauty, strength and skill. We will know
whether these things lead to the welfare of ourselves and others or
not.

How confused is life if one is ignorant of the Dhamma. One does not know
what is wholesome and what is unwholesome; one does not know about
cause and effect in life. When one suffers one does not understand why
this has to happen. In everyone's life there is at different times the
experience of pleasant objects and the experience of unpleasant objects
through the senses; there is the experience of the vicissitudes of
life. We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Eights, Ch I, par 5,
Worldly Failings) about the ``worldly conditions'' (lokadhamma):

@quotation

Monks, these eight worldly conditions obsess the world; the world
revolves around these eight worldly conditions. What eight?

Gain and loss, fame and obscurity, blame and praise, contentment and
pain@dots{}

@end quotation

How susceptible we are to those worldly conditions. We are so sensitive
to the way people treat us. We attach great importance to blame and
praise, to honour and dishonour. If we do not receive the honour we
think is due to us we feel slighted. We have feelings of bitterness
towards those who treat us badly. If we do not make the career in life
we were hoping for, or if work is assigned to us which we consider to
be beneath our dignity, we feel frustrated. There are many things in
life which cause us to feel irritated, depressed or angry. Is there one
day when everything goes according to our wishes, one day of perfect
happiness? When we do not have right understanding we are obsessed by
the ``worldly conditions''; we are foolish people.

The Buddha pointed out the dangers of being enslaved to these worldly
conditions. To what does such enslavement lead? It leads to an unhappy
rebirth. Devadatta, who caused a schism in the order and who separated
from it with five hundred monks, was a fool; he was obsessed by the
worldly conditions and corrupted by evil friendship. We read in the
Gradual Sayings (Book of the Eights, Ch I, par 7, Devadatta) that the
Buddha, while he was staying on Vulture's Peak, not long after the
departure of Devadatta, said to the monks:

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, mastered by eight wrong states, Devadatta, with his mind out
of control, became one doomed to suffer in hell, in perdition, dwelling
there a kappa@footnote{A ``world-period'' or aeon, an inconceivably long
space of time. }, irreprievable. By what eight?

Mastered by gain@dots{}by loss@dots{}by fame@dots{}by obscurity@dots{}by honour@enddots{}
by lack of honour@dots{}by evil intentions@dots{}by evil friendship, with his
mind out of control, Devadatta became one doomed to suffer in hell, in
perdition, dwelling there a kappa, irreprievable@enddots{}

@end quotation

Fools like Devadatta who are obsessed by worldly conditions cannot teach
Dhamma. They want others to follow them blindly. They do not lead
people to the Buddha's teachings so that they can investigate the truth
for themselves. If we associate with fools we cannot develop right
understanding of our life. We will become more obsessed by the worldly
conditions and there will be no way for us to eradicate defilements.

The Buddha, ``Teacher of devas and men'', taught out of compassion for the
world, not in order to have ``gain, honour and praise'' in return. He
pointed out that it is the Dhamma which is important, not the person
who teaches it. We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khanda-vagga,
Kindred Sayings on Elements, Middle Fifty, Ch IV, par 87, Vakkali) that
the Buddha visited Vakkali who was sick and who was so attached to the
sight of the Buddha. Vakkali said:

@quotation

``For a long time, lord, I have been longing to set eyes on the Exalted
one, but I had not strength enough in this body to come to see the
Exalted One.''

``Hush, Vakkali! What is there in seeing this vile body of mine? He who
sees the Dhamma, Vakkali, he sees me; he who sees me, Vakkali, he sees
the Dhamma. Verily, seeing the Dhamma, Vakkali, one sees me; seeing me,
one sees the Dhamma.

As to this, what do you think, Vakkali? Is body permanent or
impermanent?''

``Impermanent, lord.''

``Is feeling@dots{}perception, the activities, is consciousness permanent or
impermanent?''

`` Impermanent, lord.'' 

``Wherefore, Vakkali, he who thus sees@dots{}he knows '@dots{}for life in these
conditions there is no hereafter'. ``

@end quotation

Further on in this sutta we read that Vakkali took the knife in order to
kill himself. The Buddha told the monks that Vakkali had attained
arahatship before he died. He could become an arahat because he had
developed insight to that degree. 

The wise person does not want others to follow him blindly, but he helps
them in such a way that they can realize the truth themselves, without
being dependent on him; this is the most effective way one can help
others. He leads them directly to the Buddha's teachings and encourages
them to study the ``Tipiṭaka'', the three Collections of the Vinaya, the
Suttanta and the Abhidhamma. Then they can have wise consideration of
the teachings and verify the Dhamma themselves. He points out the way
by which they can realize for themselves the truth of impermanence,
dukkha and anattā. The aim of the Buddha's teachings is to see
realities as they are. So long as we have not realized the truth we
take for permanent what is impermanent, we take for happiness what is
not happiness, we take for self what is non-self. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Salāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, First Fifty, Ch III, par 26, Comprehension) that the Buddha said: 

@quotation

Without fully knowing, without comprehending the all, monks, without
detaching himself from, without abandoning the all, a man is incapable
of extinguishing dukkha.

Without fully knowing, without comprehending, without detaching himself
from, without abandoning what (all) is a man incapable of extinguishing
dukkha?

It is by not fully knowing the eye@dots{}objects@dots{}eye-consciousness@enddots{}
eye-contact@dots{}that pleasant or unpleasant or indifferent feeling@enddots{}
the tongue@dots{}savours@dots{}the body@dots{}touches@dots{}the mind@enddots{}
mind-objects@enddots{}@footnote{Also the ear, sound, the nose, odour, the
contacts through the ear, the nose and the other doorways, and the
feelings arising conditioned by those contacts are included in the
``all'', as is explained in par 23, ``The all''.} that a man is incapable of
extinguishing dukkha. This is the all, monks, without fully knowing
which@dots{}a man is so incapable.

But by fully knowing, by comprehending, by detaching himself from, by
abandoning the all, one is capable of extinguishing dukkha.


@end quotation

The Buddha pointed out the impermanence of seeing, hearing and all the
other realities which can be experienced through the six doors, in
order to remind people to be aware of the seeing at this moment, of the
hearing at this moment. If we are not mindful of seeing-consciousness
which appears at the present moment or of the other realities appearing
now, there will not be a precise understanding of their characteristics
and thus we will not be able to see them as they are. The wise person
does not teach a Dhamma which is different from the Buddha's teachings.
He does not point out things which do not lead to the goal. He does not
discourage people from study and he does not discourage them from being
mindful during their daily activities. He encourages them to be mindful
of the reality appearing at the present moment, no matter where they
are and what they are doing. It is essential to find out whether the
person with whom we associate is the right friend in Dhamma or not. If
he is not the right person he cannot point out to us the way to see
things as they are. We will know that he is the right person if he
helps us to understand the characteristic of seeing which appears now,
of hearing which appears now, and of the other realities which present
themselves through the six doors. This is the way the Buddha taught as
the one and only way to eradicate the clinging to the concept of self,
to see things as they are. When there will be less attachment to the
concept of self we will know from our own experience that association
with the wise is the highest blessing.

To honour those who are worthy of honour is the highest blessing. The
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha are worthy of honour. The wise person
who taught us the development of the eightfold Path is worthy of
honour. How can we honour those who are worthy of honour in the most
appropriate way? We feel deep gratitude to the Buddha and we want to
give expression to our gratitude. We can honour him by following his
last words: ``Transient are all the elements of being! Strive with
earnestness!'' (Mahā-Parinibbāna-sutta, Dialogues of the Buddha II, no.
16). We should not be heedless, we should be mindful of realities.
Without the Buddha's teachings we could not be mindful at this moment
and there would be no way to eradicate defilements. The whole purpose
of the teachings is the eradication of defilements through the
development of right understanding. Therefore, each moment of
mindfulness is the highest possible way of respect to the Buddha, the
Dhamma and the Sangha.

``To reside in a suitable location'' is among the highest blessings. We
cannot meet the good friend in Dhamma in just any place; wise people
are rare in the world. It is a great blessing to live in a country
where Dhamma is taught and practised, so that one has an opportunity to
know the Buddha's teaching. There are many factors that have to
coincide in order to meet the right person. It is not by mere chance
that we meet him; it is conditioned by kamma, by good deeds which have
been performed. 

When someone meets a wise person he may not be ready yet to receive the
Dhamma. It may not be the right time for him to listen to the Dhamma;
he may not be capable yet of wise consideration of the teachings. The
accumulation of wholesome deeds is very helpful for making us ready to
receive the Dhamma. ``To have done meritorious actions in the past'' is
among the highest blessings. We read in the ``Thera-Therīgāthā'' that the
men and women in the Buddha's time who attained enlightenment had
accumulated meritorious deeds for aeon's and that they had also listened
to the Dhamma preached by Buddhas of former times. We read, for
example, about Subhā (Commentary to the Therīgāthā, the
Paramattha-Dīpanī, commentary to Canto XII, 70, Subhā): 

She, too, having made her resolve under former Buddhas, and accumulating
good of age-enduring efficacy, so that she had progressively planted
the root of good and accumulated the conditions for emancipation, was,
in this Buddha era reborn at Rājagaha@enddots{}

Subhā listened to the Buddha, developed insight and attained
enlightenment, even to the stage of the arahat. When we know about the
conditions necessary for wisdom to reach maturity we will be less
inclined to think that it is self who develops the eightfold Path. When
we read that men and women in the Buddha's time had accumulated good of
``age-enduring efficacy'', that they had listened to the Dhamma preached
by former Buddhas, before they met the Buddha Gotama and attained
enlightenment, we are reminded not to be heedless at the present time. 

The Buddha taught satipaṭṭhāna to monks, nuns, laymen and women
lay-followers. As regards the life of the monk, the Vinaya should not be
separated from satipaṭṭhāna. In the Buddha's time the Vinaya and
satipaṭṭhāna were not separated. We read in the
``Mahā-Maṅgala-sutta that one of the highest blessings is ``a highly
trained discipline'' (vinaya). The commentary to this sutta (the
Paramatthajotika) speaks about the discipline of the layman, abstinence
from the ten immoral actions@footnote{These are three unwholesome
actions through the body, which are killing, stealing and sexual
misbehaviour. There are four unwholesome actions through speech, which
are lying, slandering, rude speech and idle speech. There are three
unwholesome mental actions, which are covetousness, ill-will and wrong
views. }, and about the discipline of the monk. The monk who develops
the eightfold Path will have a deeper understanding of the Vinaya and
he will observe the rules more perfectly. Each detail of the Vinaya is
full of meaning because the rules support the welfare of the community
of the monks, the Sangha, and help the monk to lead a pure life; the
rules help him to be considerate in his speech and actions, to cause no
trouble to others. The Vinaya teaches the monk to be watchful in body,
speech and mind. When we develop mindfulness there is watchfulness as
regards the six doors. Through right understanding of nāma and rūpa we
will come to know our subtle defilements and the danger of even these
defilements. The monk who develops satipaṭṭhāna will have a deeper
respect for the rules of the Vinaya which remind him to be watchful,
seeing danger in even the slightest faults. Thus we see that Vinaya and
satipaṭṭhāna should not be separated.

The monk who develops the eightfold Path and attains enlightenment will
not leave the order anymore and return to the ``lower life'', the
layman's life. We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book I,
Ch VI, par 12, The river) that the Buddha spoke by way of simile about
the monk who will not return to the layman's life; he said that the
river Ganges, tending towards the east, cannot be made to change its
course and tend towards the west. We read:

Just so monks, if the rājah's royal ministers or his friends or boon
companions or kinsmen or blood relatives were to come to a monk who is
cultivating and making much of the ariyan eightfold way, and were to
seek to entice him with wealth, saying: ``Come, good man! Why should
these yellow robes torment you? Why parade about with shaven crown and
bowl? Come! Return to the lower life and enjoy possessions and do deeds
of merit'' for that monk so cultivating and making much of the ariyan
way, return to the lower life is impossible. Why so? Because, monks,
that monk's heart has for many a long day been bent on detachment,
inclined to detachment, turned towards detachment, so that there is no
possibility for him to return to the lower life@enddots{}

The eightfold Path can change the lives of monks and laypeople. It can
change the relationship between parents and children, husband and wife,
relatives and friends. There is bound to be attachment and displeasure
or anger in one's relationship with others, but when satipaṭṭhāna is
developed there will be less clinging to the concept of self and this
will bear also on our relationship with others. When other people treat
us badly we can remember that in the ultimate sense there is no self or
person who suffers, and that there is no person who behaves in a
disagreeable way. There are only nāma and rūpa arising because of
conditions. 

We are still susceptible to the worldly conditions of gain and loss,
honour and dishonour, blame and praise, well-being and pain. It is
unavoidable that there are both pleasant and unpleasant experiences in
our life: one day there is blame, the next day there is praise.
However, when we learn that receiving blame or praise are only
phenomena which arise because of conditions and fall away immediately,
we will gradually attach less importance to them. We read in the
Mahā-Maṅgala-sutta: 

@quotation

``If a man's mind is sorrowless, stainless, and secure, and does not
shake when touched by worldly vicissitudes @minus{}this is the Highest
Blessing.''

Those who are arahats have a mind unruffled by worldly conditions, they
are free from sorrow, free from defilements. Nothing can disturb the
arahat any more. The sutta continues:

``Those who are thus acting are everywhere unconquered, attain happiness
everywhere @minus{}to them these are the Highest Blessings.''

@end quotation

We are not free from sorrow. So long as there is clinging to the concept
of self there is no end to lobha, dosa and moha. Our defilements are
the real cause of the suffering in our life, day after day. The
Mahā-Maṅgala-sutta tells us about the blessings of a life full of
Dhamma. We read about loving-kindness in the relationship between
parents and children, between husband and wife, between relatives and
friends. We read about righteous conduct, diligence in virtue,
reverence, humility, patience, self-restraint, a holy and pure life.
When we read about all these blessings we may feel at times discouraged
about the practice of the Dhamma. We are inclined to think that the
eightfold Path is too difficult and that we are too far from the
realization of the truth. We would like to have less lobha, dosa and
moha; but can we force ourselves not to be attached to pleasant things,
not to be disturbed by unpleasant things? We should always remember
that the Buddha became enlightened and taught the truth for our welfare
and happiness. The Buddha taught the Dhamma which can be practised in
daily life. ``To set oneself in the right course'' is among the highest
blessings. When we have associated with a wise person who can explain
the Dhamma to us, when we have listened to the Dhamma and carefully
considered it, we can set ourselves in the right course. Defilements
cannot be eradicated immediately, but if there is less ignorance of
realities we can experience that it is a blessing to have been able to
listen to the Dhamma. Through the development of satipaṭṭhāna the
notion of self will gradually decrease until it is finally eradicated.
And, thus, we will experience the highest blessings of the Dhamma. 

@node Glossary
@unnumbered Glossary

@table @code

@item 
@item abhidhamma 
the higher teachings of Buddhism, teachings on ultimate 
realities.   

@item adosa
non aversion.   

@item  akusala
unwholesome, unskilful.   

@item  alobha
non attachment, generosity.   

@item  amoha
wisdom or understanding.   

@item  anāgāmī
non-returner, person who has reached the third stage of enlightenment, he has no aversion (dosa).   

@item  anattā
not self.   

@item  anicca
impermanence.   
  
@item  appanā
absorption.    

@item  arahat
noble person who has attained the fourth and last stage of enlightenment.    

@item  ārammaṇa
object which is known by consciousness.    

@item  ariyan
noble person who has attained enlightenment.    

@item  arūpa-bhūmi
plane of arūpa jhānacitta.    

@item  arūpa-brahma
plane plane of existence attained as a result of arūpa-jhāna. 
 There are no sense impressions, no rūpa experienced in this realm.    

@item  arūpa-jhāna
immaterial absorption.    

@item āsavas
influxes or intoxicants, group of defilements .    

@item  asobhana
not beautiful, not accompanied by beautiful roots.    

@item  asubha
foul.    

@item  asura
demon, being of one of the unhappy planes of existence.
 

@item  Atthasālinī
The Expositor, a commentary to the first book of the Abhidhamma
 Piṭaka.    
  

@item  avijjā
ignorance.    

@item  ayoniso manasikāra
unwise attention to an object.    

@item  bhāvanā
mental development, comprising the development of calm and the 
 development of insight.    

@item  bhavanga
life-continuum.    



@item  bhikkhu
monk.    

@item  bhikkhunī
nun.   

@item bhūmi
plane of existence or plane of citta.   

@item brahma-vihāras
the four divine abidings, meditation subjects which are: loving
 kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, equanimity.   

@item Buddha
a fully enlightened person who has discovered the truth all 
 by himself, without the aid of a teacher and can proclaim Dhamma to 
 the world. 
 
@item Buddhaghosa
commentator on the Tipiṭaka, author of the Visuddhimagga in
 5 A.D.   

@item cakkhu
eye.  



@item cetanā
volition or intention.   

@item cetasika
mental factor arising with consciousness.   

@item citta
consciousness, the reality which knows or cognizes an object.   

@item cuti-citta
dying-consciousness.   

@item dāna
generosity, giving.   


@item dhamma
reality, truth, the teachings.   


 
@item Dhammasangaṇi
the first book of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka.   

@item Dhātukathā
Discussion on the Elements, the third book of the Abhidhamma.   

@item diṭṭhi
wrong view, distorted view of realities.   

@item domanassa
unpleasant feeling.  

@item dosa
aversion or ill will.   

@item dosa-mūla-citta
citta (consciousness) rooted in aversion.   

@item dukkha
suffering, unsatisfactoriness of conditioned realities.   

@item dukkha vedanā
painful feeling or unpleasant feeling.   

@item dvāra
doorway through which an object is experienced, the five sense-doors or
 the mind door.   

@item ekaggatā
concentration, one-pointedness, a cetasika which has the function 
 to focus on one object.   

@item ganthas
bonds, a group of defilements.   

@item ghāna-dhātu
nose element.   



@item gotrabhū
change of lineage, the last citta of the sense-sphere before jhāna,
 absorption, is attained, or enlightenment is attained.   

@item hadaya-vatthu
heart-base, rūpa which is the plane of origin of the cittas other
 than the sense-cognitions.   

@item hasituppāda-citta
smile producing consciousness of an arahat.   

@item hetu
root, which conditions citta to be “beautiful” or unwholesome.   

@item indriya
faculty. Some are rūpas such as the sense organs, some are nāmas
 such as feeling. Five 'spiritual faculties' are wholesome 
 faculties which should be cultivated, namely: confidence, 
 energy, awareness, concentration and wisdom.
 
@item issā
envy.   

@item jāti
birth, nature, class (of cittas).   

@item javana-citta
cittas which 'run through the object', kusala citta or akusala citta
 in the case of non-arahats.   

@item jhāna
absorption which can be attained through the development of calm.   

@item jhāna-factors
cetasikas which have to be cultivated for the attainment of 
 jhāna: vitakka, vicāra, pīti, sukha, samādhi.   

   

@item kāma
sensual enjoyment or the five sense objects.   

@item kāma-bhūmi
sensuous plane of existence.   

@item kāmacchandha
sensuous desire.   

@item kāma-sobhana cittas
beautiful cittas of the sense sphere.   

@item kāmāvacara cittas
cittas of the sense sphere.   

@item kamma
intention or volition; deed motivated by volition.   

@item kammapatha
course of action performed through body, speech or mind which
 can be wholesome or unwholesome.   

@item karuṇā
compassion.   

@item kasiṇa
disk, used as an object for the development of calm.   

@item kāya
body. It can also stand for the “mental body”, the cetasikas.   




@item khandhas
aggregates of conditioned realities classified as five groups: physical
 phenomena, feelings, perception or remembrance, activities or
 formations (cetasikas other than feeling or perception), consciousness.   



@item kilesa
defilements.   

@item kiriya citta
inoperative citta, neither cause nor result.   

@item kukkucca
regret or worry.   

@item kusala citta
wholesome consciousness.   

@item kusala kamma
a good deed.   

@item kusala
wholesome, skillful.   

@item lobha
attachment, greed.   

@item lobha-mūla-citta
consciousness rooted in attachment.   


@item macchariya
stinginess.   

@item magga
path (eightfold Path).  

@item magga-citta
path consciousness, supramundane citta which experiences 
 nibbāna and eradicates defilements.   



@item mahā-kusala citta
wholesome citta of the sense sphere.   

@item mahā-vipākacitta
citta of the sense sphere which is result, accompanied by
 “beautiful” roots.   

@item manāyatana
mind-base, including all cittas.   

@item mano
mind, citta, consciousness.   

 


@item māra
“the evil one”—all that leads to dukkha   

@item mettā
loving kindness.   

@item middha
torpor or languor.   

@item moha
ignorance. 
moha-mūla-citta citta rooted in ignorance.   

@item muditā
sympathetic joy.  

@item nāma
mental phenomena, including those which are conditioned and also the
 unconditioned nāma which is nibbāna.   



@item nibbāna
the unconditioned reality, the reality which does not arise and fall 
 away.The destruction of lust, hatred and delusion. The deathless. 
 The end of suffering.   

@item nimitta
mental image one can acquire of a meditation subject in tranquil 
 meditation.   

@item nirodha-samāpatti
attainment of cessation of consciousness.   

@item nīvaraṇa
hindrances, a group of defilements.   

@item ñāṇa
wisdom, insight.   



@item Pacceka Buddha
Silent Buddha, an enlightened one who has found the truth
 by himself but does not proclaim Dhamma to the world.   



@item Paṭṭhāna
Conditional Relations, the seventh book of the Abhidhamma.   

@item paṭisandhi citta
rebirth consciousness.   

@item Pāli
the language of the Buddhist teachings.  


@item paññā
wisdom or understanding.   

@item paññatti
concepts, conventional terms.   

@item paramattha dhamma
truth in the absolute sense: mental and physical phenomena, each with their own characteristic.   



@item pīti
joy, rapture, enthusiasm.   



@item puthujjana
“worldling”, a person who has not attained enlightenment.   

@item Rāhula
the Buddha's son.   



@item rūpa
physical phenomena, realities which do not experience anything.   

@item rūpa-brahma
plane rūpa-bhūmi, fine material realm of existence attained as a
 result of rūpa-jhāna.   

@item rūpa-jhāna
fine material absorption, developed with a meditation subject
 which is still dependant on materiality.   

@item rūpa-khandha
aggregate or group of all physical phenomena (rūpas).   

@item rūpāvacara cittas
rūpa-jhānacittas, consciousness of the fine-material sphere.   



@item saddhā
confidence.   

 


@item sakadāgāmī
once-returner, a noble person who has attained the second stage
 of enlightenment. 
@item samādhi
concentration or one-pointedness, ekaggatā cetasika.   

@item samatha
the development of calm.   

@item sammā
right.   



@item Sangha
community of monks and nuns. As one of the triple Gems it means the
 community of those people who have attained enlightenment.   


.  

@item saññā
memory, remembrance or “perception”.   


@item sati
mindfulness or awareness: non-forgetfulness of what is wholesome, or
 non-forgetfulness of realities which appear.   

@item satipaṭṭhāna sutta
Middle Length Sayings 1, number 10, also Dīgha Nikāya, 
 Dialogues, no. 22.   

@item satipaṭṭhāna
applications of mindfulness. It can mean the cetasika sati which 
 is aware of realities or the objects of mindfulness which are classified as four applications of mindfulness: Body, Feeling Citta,
 Dhamma. Or it can mean the development of direct understanding of realities through awareness.   



@item sīla
morality in action or speech, virtue.   




@item somanassa
happy feeling.   



@item sotāpanna
person who has attained the first stage of enlightenment, and who
 has eradicated wrong view of realities.   



@item sukha
happy, pleasant.   

@item sukha-vedanā
pleasant feeling.   


@item sutta
part of the scriptures containing dialogues at different places on different
 occasions.   

@item suttanta
a sutta text. 


@item Tathāgata
literally “thus gone”, epithet of the Buddha.   

@item tatramajjhattatā
equanimity or even-mindedness.   



@item Theravāda Buddhism
`Doctrine of the Elders', the oldest tradition of
 Buddhism.  

@item thīna
sloth.   

@item Tipiṭaka
the teachings of the Buddha contained in the Vinaya, the Suttanta and
 the Abhidhamma.   

@item uddhacca
restlessness.   

@item Udāna
Verses of Uplift from the Minor Anthologies.   


@item upādāna
clinging.   

@item upādāna-kkhandhas
khandhas of clinging.   

@item upekkhā
indifferent feeling. It can stand for even-mindedness or equanimity
 and then it is not feeling.   


@item vāyo-dhātu
element of wind or motion.   

@item vedanā
feeling.   

@item vedanā-kkhandha
group of all feelings.   

@item Vibhaṅga
“Book of Analysis”, second book of the Abhidhamma.   


@item vinaya
Book of Discipline for the monks.  

@item viññāṇa
consciousness, citta.   

@item viññāṇa-dhātu
element of consciousness, comprising all cittas.   

@item viññāṇa-kkhandha
group of all cittas (consciousness).   



@item vipākacitta
citta which is the result of a wholesome deed (kusala kamma) or
 an unwholesome deed (akusala kamma). It can arise as rebirth-
 consciousness, or during life as the experience of pleasant or
 unpleasant objects through the senses, such as seeing, hearing, etc.   

@item vipassanā
wisdom which sees realities as they are.   



@item viriya
energy.   



@item Visuddhimagga
an Encyclopedia of the Buddha's teachings, written by Buddhaghosa
 in the fifth century A.D.   



@item Yamaka
the Book of Pairs, the sixth book of the Abhidhamma.   

@item yoniso manasikāra
wise attention to the object.  
@end table

@unnumbered Books


@section Books written by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 

@item 
@emph{Abhidhamma in Daily Life} is an exposition of absolute realities
in detail. Abhidhamma means higher doctrine and the book's purpose
is to encourage the right application of Buddhism in order to eradicate
wrong view and eventually all defilements.

@item 
@emph{The Buddha's Path} An Introduction to the doctrine of Theravada
Buddhism for those who have no previous knowledge. The four noble
Truths - suffering - the origin of suffering - the cessation of suffering
- and the way leading to the end of suffering - are explained as a
philosophy and a practical guide which can be followed in today's world.
@item 
@emph{Buddhism in Daily Life} A general introduction to the main ideas
of Theravada Buddhism.The purpose of this book is to help the reader
gain insight into the Buddhist scriptures and the way in which the
teachings can be used to benefit both ourselves and others in everyday
life.

@item 
@emph{The World in the Buddhist Sense} The purpose of this book is to
show that the Buddha's Path to true understanding has to be developed
in daily life.
@item 
@emph{Cetasikas} Cetasika means 'belonging to the mind'. It is a mental
factor which accompanies consciousness (citta) and experiences an
object. There are 52 cetasikas. This book gives an outline of each
of these 52 cetasikas and shows the relationship they have with each
other.
@item 
@emph{The Buddhist Teaching on Physical Phenomena} A general introduction
to physical phenomena and the way they are related to each other and
to mental phenomena. The purpose of this book is to show that the
study of both mental phenomena and physical phenomena is indispensable
for the development of the eightfold Path. 

@item
@emph{The Conditionality of Life} By Nina van Gorkom


This book is an introduction to the seventh book of the Abhidhamma,
that deals with the conditionality of life. It explains the deep underlying
motives for all actions through body, speech and mind and shows that these are
dependent on conditions and cannot be controlled by a ‘self’. This book is suitable for those who have already made a study of
the Buddha’s teachings. 
@end itemize

@section Books translated by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 
@item 
@emph{Mettā: Loving kindness in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. An introduction to the basic
Buddhist teachings of mettā, loving kindness, and its practical application
in todays world.
@item 
@emph{Taking Refuge in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. Taking Refuge in Buddhism is an introduction
to the development of insight meditation.
@item 
@emph{A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas
is a guide to the development of the Buddha's path of wisdom, covering
all aspects of human life and human behaviour, good and bad. This
study explains that right understanding is indispensable for mental
development, the development of calm as well as the development of
insight.
@item 
@emph{The Perfections Leading to Enlightenment} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. The Perfections is a
study of the ten good qualities: generosity, morality, renunciation,
wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness, determination, loving-kindness,
and equanimity.


@end itemize
These and other articles can be seen at www.zolag.co.uk or www.scribd.com
(search for zolag).



@bye
