Thinking about reality
======================

Our thinking about reality is conditioned by many ideas we acquired
through our education an through the culture in which we are rooted. If
we want to understand what the Buddha taught we should not hold on to
our own ideas about reality and we should be open-minded to his
teaching. Then we will notice that his teaching is completely different
from our ideas about reality. The Buddha taught about everything which
appears no and which can be directly experienced.  He did not teach
abstract ideas. What appears no? Is it attachment, aversion or
ignorance? Or is it generosity or compassion? In our life there are
wholesome moments and unwholesome moments and these change very
rapidly. We do not have one consciousness or mimd, but many different
moments of consciousness. Moments of consciousness are realities, not
imagination, and we can know them now, at this moment, when they
appear. Then we will notice that there are many different moments of
consciousness (cittas). When we, for example, perform a good deed there
are wholesome moments of consciousness, but also unwholesome moments of
consciousness may arise. Some slight stinginess may arise, which we
only know ourselves and which nobody else may notice. There may be
attachment to the person to whom we give a gift, or there may be
conceit. If we do not know when there is an unwholesome moment of
consciousness (akusala citta) how could we develop wholesomeness?
Through the development of right understanding of the different moments
of consciousness we will better know our defilements and then we will
see that the cause of all sadness and misery is within ourselves and not
outside ourselves.