What are realities and what are imaginations?
=============================================


What are realities and what are imaginations? We use in our language
words in order to make ourselves understood. sometimes a word
represents something which is real, which can be directly experienced,
and sometimes a word denotes an abstract idea. We must find out what
the Buddha taught about reality, otherwise we will continue to be
ignorant of what occurs in ourselves and around ourselves. then it will
be impossible to eradicate our faults and vices and we will not be
freed from our enslavement to the worldly conditions. Moments of
consciousness are not imagination, they are realities which can be
directly experienced, now, at this moment. We can come to know our good
and bad qualities when they appear. We have attachment and aversion with
regard to what we experience through the eyes, the ears and through the
other senses. Before attachment or aversion with regard to what we see
can arise, there must be a moment of just seeing. Is there seeing at
this moment? It can be experienced, it is a reality. Seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, experiences through the bodysense and through the
mind are realities, they are not imaginations. They are different
moments of consciousness which can be directly experienced with they
appear. The Buddha spoke about realities which can be directly
experienced and there are different from abstract ideas and
imaginations. Seeing is the experience of what presents itself through
the eyes, of what is visible. Seeing is different from thinking about
what we see, different from attachment. Seeing just sees. Hearing is
the experience of what presents itself through the ears, of sound.
Hearing is different from thinking about what we hear such as someone's
voice or the barking of a dog. Sound is a reality, it can be directly
experienced; but sound itself does not experience anything, it is
different from hearing. Tasting experiences flavour. Flavour can be
directly experienced when it presents itself. Flavour itself does not
experience anything, it is different from tasting. In our life there
are two kinds of realities:

- The reality which knows or experiences something, nāma

- the reality which doesnot know anything, rūpa.

Generosity, kindness, aversion, seeing or hearing are mental
phenomena or nāmas, they experience different objects. Sound, flavour,
hardness, softness, heat or cold are physical phenomena or rūpa, they
do not know anything. If we want to know what is real we should ask
ourselves: "Can it be directly experienced?"  What is real has a
characteristic which there being the need to think about it or to name
it. Everything which is real can be directly experienced through the
eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the bodysense and the
"mind-door," through these six doorways. Thus, if we want to know
whether something is real we should ask ourselves: "Can it be directly
experienced and through which of the six doorways?" nāmas and rūpas
are realities which can be directly experienced without there being the
need to think about them or to call them by a name.  Hearing is hearing
for everybody, everywhere. We can give hearing another name, but its
characteristic is the same. Sound is sound for everybody, everywhere. We
can give sound another name but its characteristic is the same.
Attachment is attachment for everybody, aversion is aversion for
everybody. We can change their name, but the realities are the same.
Generosity is a reality, it is nāma.  We may be inclined to think that
there is a person who is generous, that a self is generous, but
generosity does not stay. It is not self, only a kind of nāma which
arises and falls away. Seeing is real, it is a kind of nāma. We think,
"I see," but seeing does not stay, it is impermanent. Where is then the
self? There is no person.