Mindfulness
===========

In order to develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa, there
should be mindfulness of them when they appear. There is no self who is
mindful but it is "sati" which is mindful. Sati is a term in Pāli (the
language of the Buddhist scriptures) which can be translated as
mindfulness, non-forgetfulness or awareness. Sati is a mental factor
which accompanies each wholesome moment of consciousness. There are
different kinds and degrees of sati. When we are generous there is sati
which is non-forgetful of generosity. When we abstain from killing or
other unwholesome actions there is sati which prevents us from
unwholesomeness. There is sati with the development of calm (tranquil
meditation) and it is mindful of the meditation subject. Sati in the
development of insight or right understanding of realities has a
different object: it is mindful or non-forgetful of a nāma or rūpa
which appears now. At that moment there is no notion of a "self" or
something which exists and can stay.

We cannot induce sati whenever we want it. Listening to the Dhamma
and considering realities which appear can condition the arising of
sati. We should have right understanding of the object of awareness:
the reality which appears now, which is either nāma or rūpa, and we
should remember that only one reality appears at a time. We are
inclined to join many realities together into a "whole." I thought that
I could see a duck's foot, and I failed t understand that seeing is
different from thinking and and different from tasting. One cannot see
a duck's foot, seeing sees only visible object or colour. Thinking can
think of the idea of a duck's foot. Thinking itself is a nāma, it is
reality, and sati can be mindful of thinking. That idea of which we
think is not a reality and thus it cannot be object mindfulness. We
cannot expect there to be many moments of sati in the beginning. Sati
is non-forgetful of the reality which appears now, through one of the
six doors, and at that moment understanding of that reality can
develop. That kind of understanding is direct understanding of the
reality which appears and it is different from theoretical
understanding.

The development of direct understanding of realities is the
development of insight of the Buddha taught. it can only develop very
gradually, during many lives.  Insight leads to detachment from the
self. We learn that what we used to take for self are in reality many
different elements, nāmas and rūpas, which can be know when they
appear. My husband and I had been invited to a restaurant where it was
very cold. I have aversion towards cold and I was inclined to say
something about it. But that would have been impatience and lack of
consideration for our host and hostess. I considered that the nāmas
and rūpas which arise are beyond our control. They arise when there
are conditions for their arising. We always think that a self or a
person can be master of nāma or rūpa. Sometimes it seems that we can,
but it is not so in reality. The experience of bodily ease and pain
belongs to the eight worldly conditions which we are not master of. The
Buddha taught us to develop right understanding of realities which are
already appearing in daily life, no matter whether they are pleasant or
unpleasant. Sati can arise wherever we may be, in our daily life.  Also
when we do not feel well or when we are cold there can be mindfulness of
realities. For example, if there can be a moment of mindfulness of only
cold when it appears, there is at that moment no notion of "my feet
which are cold" or "the cold draught," which are not realities but only
ideas. After a moment of sati is never lost. Sati falls away, but it
can condition a moment of sati again, later on. We may think of the
eight worldly conditions, but he development of right understanding of
realities will help us most of all to be more patient amidst the
vicissitudes of life. Eventually the right understanding of realities
will lead to complete detachment and to freedom from all sorrow.