\input texinfo
@c $Id: abh.texi,v 1.26 2014/01/04 12.32 alan Exp $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename abhidhamma.info
@settitle Abhidhamma in Daily Life
@smallbook
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header 
@fonttextsize 10
@copying
4th edition published in 2014 by @*
 Zolag @*
 32 Woodnook Road @*
 Streatham @*
 London @*
 SW16 6TZ @*
www.zolag.co.uk @*

ISBN 978-1897633-27-4 @*
@copyright{Nina van Gorkom} @*

This work is licensed under the: @*
Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. @*
To view a copy of this license, visit: @*
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/ @*
or send a letter to: @*
Creative Commons, @*
171 Second Street, @*
Suite 300, @*
San Francisco, @*
California, @*
94105, USA.@*

 British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data @*
 A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library @*
 Printed in the UK and USA by Lightningsource. @*
$Id: abh.texi,v 1.26 2014/01/04 12.32 alan$
@end copying
@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@c @shorttitlepage Abhidhamma in Daily Life
@title Abhidhamma in Daily Life
@author Nina van Gorkom
Zolag 2014

4th Edition
@c The following two commands
@c start the copyright page.
@page

@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@ifnothtml
@contents
@end ifnothtml

@ifnottex
by Nina van Gorkom

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco, California, 94105, USA.


@node top
@top Contents

@end ifnottex
@menu
* Preface: Preface
* The Four Paramattha Dhammas: The Four Paramattha Dhammas
* The Five Khandhas: The Five Khandhas
* Different Aspects of Citta: Different Aspects of Citta
* The Characteristic of Lobha: The Characteristic of Lobha
* Different Degrees of Lobha: Different Degrees of Lobha
* The Characteristic of Dosa: The Characteristic of Dosa
* Ignorance: Ignorance
* Ahetuka Cittas (Rootless Cittas): Ahetuka Cittas (Rootless Cittas)
* Ahetuka Cittas which are Unknown in Daily Life: Ahetuka Cittas which are Unknown in Daily Life
* The First Citta in Life: The First Citta in Life
* Different Types of Rebirth-Consciousness: Different Types of Rebirth-Consciousness
* The Function of Bhavanga (Life-Continuum): The Function of Bhavanga (Life-Continuum)
* Functions of Citta: Functions of Citta
* The Function of Javana: The Function of Javana
* The Functions of Tadārammaṇa and Cuti: The Functions of Tadārammaṇa and Cuti
* Objects and Doors: Objects and Doors
* Doors and Physical Bases of Citta: Doors and Physical Bases of Citta
* Elements: Elements
* The Sobhana Cittas in our Life: The Sobhana Cittas in our Life
* Planes of Existence: Planes of Existence
* Samatha: Samatha
* Jhānacittas: Jhānacittas
* Lokuttara Cittas: Lokuttara Cittas
* Enlightenment: Enlightenment
* Glossary: Glossary
@end menu

@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface

The Buddha's teachings, contained in the ``Tipiṭaka''
(Three Baskets) are: the Vinaya (Book of Discipline for the monks), the
Suttanta (Discourses) and the Abhidhamma. All three parts of the
Tipiṭaka can be an inexhaustible source of inspiration and
encouragement to the practice, the development of right understanding
of realities. The development of right understanding will eventually
lead to the eradication of wrong view and the other defilements. In all
three parts of the Tipiṭaka we are taught about
@dfn{dhamma},
about everything which is real. Seeing is a dhamma, it is real. Colour
is a dhamma, it is real. Feeling is a dhamma, it is real. Our
defilements are dhammas, they are realities. 

When the Buddha attained enlightenment he clearly knew all dhammas as
they really are. He taught the
 ``Dhamma'',
the teaching on realities, to us in order that we also may know dhammas
as they are. Without the Buddha's teaching we would be
ignorant of reality. We are inclined to take for permanent what is
impermanent, for pleasant what is sorrowful and unsatisfactory
(dukkha), and for
``self''
what is non-self. The aim of all three parts of the Tipiṭaka is to
teach people the development of the way leading to the end of
defilements. 

The Vinaya contains the rules for the monks and these rules help them to
live to perfection the ``brahman
life'' and to reach
``@dots{}that unsurpassed goal of the
brahman life, realizing it by personal knowledge even in this life; for
the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home into the
homeless life@enddots{}'' (Gradual Sayings,
Book of the Fives, chapter VI, paragraph 6, The Preceptor). The goal of the
``brahman life'' is the eradication of defilements.

Not only monks, but also laymen should study the Vinaya. We read about
the instances that monks deviated from their purity of life; when there
was such a case, a rule was laid down in order to help them to be
watchful. When we read the Vinaya we are reminded of our own attachment
(lobha), aversion (dosa) and ignorance (moha); they are realities. So
long as they have not been eradicated they can arise at any time. We
are reminded how deeply rooted defilements are and what they can lead
to. When we consider this, we are motivated to develop the eightfold
Path which leads to the eradication of wrong view, jealousy,
stinginess, conceit and all other defilements.

In the Suttanta, the
``Discourses'',
the Dhamma is explained to different people at different places on
various occasions. The Buddha taught about all realities appearing
through the ``six
doors'' of eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
body-sense and mind. He taught about cause and effect and about the
practice leading to the end of all sorrow. 

As regards the @dfn{Abhidhamma}, this is an exposition of all realities in
detail. The prefix
``abhi'' is used in the sense of
``preponderance'' or ``distinction''. ``Abhidhamma'' means ``higher dhamma'' or
``dhamma in detail''. The form of this part of
the Tipiṭaka is different, but the aim is the same: the eradication of
wrong view and eventually of all defilements. Thus, when we study the
many enumerations of realities, we should not forget the real purpose
of our study. The theory (pariyatti) should encourage us to the
practice (paṭipatti) which is necessary for the realization of the
truth (paṭivedha). While we are studying the different mental phenomena
(nāmas) and physical phenomena (rūpas) and while we are pondering over
them, we can be reminded to be aware of the nāma and rūpa which appear
at that moment. In this way we will discover more and more that the
Abhidhamma explains everything which is real, that is, the
``worlds''
appearing through the six doors of the senses and the mind. 

This book is meant as an introduction to the study of the Abhidhamma. In
order to understand this book, some basic knowledge of Buddhism is
necessary. My book The Buddha's Path could be helpful
to make the reader acquainted with the basic principles and tenets of
Buddhism before he starts to read this book on the Abhidhamma. 

I am using terms in Pāli which is the original language of the
scriptures of the old Theravāda tradition. The English equivalents of
the Pāli terms are often unsatisfactory since they stem from Western
philosophy and psychology and therefore give an association of meaning
which is different from the meaning intended by the Buddhist teachings.
I hope that the reader, instead of being discouraged by the Pāli terms
and by the many enumerations which are used in this book, will develop
a growing interest in the realities to be experienced in and around
himself. 

Ms. Sujin Boriharnwanaket has been of immense assistance and inspiration
to me in my study of the Abhidhamma. She encouraged me to discover for
myself that the Abhidhamma deals with realities to be experienced
through the senses and the mind. Thus I learnt that the study of the
Abhidhamma is a process which continues throughout life. I hope that
the reader will have a similar experience and that he will be full of
enthusiasm and gladness every time he studies realities which can be
experienced!

I have quoted many times from the suttas in order to show that the
teaching contained in the Abhidhamma is not different from the teaching
in the other parts of the Tipiṭaka. I have mostly used the English
translation of the ``Pāli Text
Society'' (Translation Series). For
the quotations from the Visuddhimagga (Path of Purification) I have
used the translation by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli (Colombo, Sri Lanka, 1964).
The Visuddhimagga is an Encyclopedia on Buddhism written by the
commentator Buddhaghosa in the fifth century A.D. He also edited the
commentaries to most parts of the Tipiṭaka, thereby basing his works on
older commentarial traditions.

The Abhidhamma consists of the following seven books @footnote{For a
synopsis of their contents see: Guide through the Abhidhamma Pitaka
by Ven.  Nyanatiloka.}:

@itemize 

@item
Dhammasangaṇi (Buddhist Psychological Ethics) 

@item
Vibhaṅga (Book of Analysis)

@item
Dhātukathā (Discussion on the Elements)

@item
Puggalapaññatti (A Designation of Human Types)

@item
Kathāvatthu (Points of Controversy)

@item
Yamaka (the Book of Pairs)

@item
Paṭṭhāna (Conditional Relations)

@end itemize

When I first started to write this book my sources were the
Visuddhimagga and the Atthasālinī (Expositor), the commentary to the
Dhammasangaṇi, written by Buddhaghosa. I also used the Abhidhammattha
Sangaha, an Encyclopedia of the Abhidhamma, written by Anuruddha
@footnote{This work was composed some time between the 8th and the
12th century A.D. It has been translated into English and published by
the P.T.S. under the title of “Compendium of Philosophy”, and by Ven.
Nārada, Colombo, under the title of “A Manual of Abhidhamma”. It has
also been translated by the Venerable Bikkhu Bodhi as “A Comprehensive
Manual of Abhidhamma”. Moreover, it has been translated together with
its commentary as “Summary of the Topics of Abhidhamma” and “Exposition
of the Topics of Abhidhamma”, by R.P. Wijeratne and Rupert Gethin.}.
These works helped me greatly with the study of the Abhidhamma itself,
of the Dhammasangaṇi and some of the other books of the abhidhamma I
gradually acquired later on. 

The commentaries give a detailed explanation and nomenclature of the
different cittas, moments of consciousness, which each perform their
own function, and they deal with the different processes of cittas
experiencing an object through a sense-door or through the mind-door.
Although not all the details concerning the processes of cittas can be
found in the scriptures themselves, the commentaries are firmly based
on the scriptures. The essence of the subjects explained by the
commentaries can be found in the scriptures. The Dhammasangaṇi, which
is an analytical exposition of realities, enumerates different cittas
arising in processes. The Vibhaṅga, under
``Analysis of the
Elements'', refers to cittas
performing their functions in processes and also the Paṭṭhāna refers to
processes of cittas under the heading of some of the conditions it
deals with. Moreover, the Paṭisambhidāmagga (Khuddaka Nikāya) mentions
(I, Treatise on Knowledge, in chapter XVII, under
``behaviour of
citta'', viññāṇa cariya) different
functions of citta in a process. I hope that these few references show
that the commentator did not give his own personal views, but was
faithful to the tradition of the original scriptures. 

In the last four chapters of this book I explain about the cittas which
attain jhāna, absorption, and the cittas which attain enlightenment.
Some readers may wonder why they should know details about these
subjects. It is useful to study details about jhāna and enlightenment
because people may have wrong notions about them. The study of the
Abhidhamma will help one not to be deluded about realities. Moreover,
it will help one to understand the suttas where there is often
reference to jhāna and to the attainment of enlightenment.

I have added some questions after the chapters which may help the reader
to ponder over what he has read. 

The late Bhikkhu Dhammadharo (Alan Driver) and also Mr. Jonothan Abbott
gave me most helpful corrections and suggestions for the text of the
first edition of this book. I also want to acknowledge my gratitude to
the ``Dhamma Study and Propagation
Foundation'' and to the publisher
Alan Weller who have made possible the third edition of this book.

@sp 1

@emph{Nina van Gorkom} 

@node The Four Paramattha Dhammas
@chapter The Four Paramattha Dhammas

There are two kinds of reality: mental phenomena or @b{nāma} and physical
phenomena or @b{rūpa}. Nāma experiences something; rūpa does not experience
anything. What we take for ``self'' are only nāma and rūpa which arise and fall
away. The Visuddhimagga (Path of Purification chapter XVIII, 25)
explains:
@quotation
For this has been said:
@end quotation

@example

``As with the assembly of parts 
The word `chariot' is countenanced,
So, when the khandhas are present, 
`A being' is said in common usage''.
     (Kindred Sayings I, 135)

@end example

@quotation
@dots{}So in many hundred suttas there is only
mentality-materiality which is illustrated, not a being, not
a person. Therefore, just as when the component parts (of a
chariot) such as axles, wheels, frame, poles@enddots{} are
arranged in a certain way, there comes to be the mere
conventional term `chariot', yet in the ultimate sense, when
each part is examined, there is no chariot@dots{} so too,
when there are the five khandhas of clinging there comes to
be the mere conventional term `a being', `a person', yet in
the ultimate sense, when each component is examined, there
is no being as a basis for the assumption `I am' or `I'; in
the ultimate sense there is only mentality-materiality. The
vision of one who sees in this way is called correct vision.

@end quotation
All phenomena in and around ourselves are only nāma and rūpa which arise
and fall away; they are impermanent. Nāma and rūpa are absolute
realities, in Pāli: @dfn{paramattha dhammas.} We can experience their
characteristics when they appear, no matter how we name them; we do not
necessarily have to call them nāma and rūpa. Those who have developed
``insight''
can experience them as they really are: impermanent and not self.
Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, experiencing tangible object
through the bodysense and thinking, all these nāmas are impermanent. We
are used to thinking that there is a self who performs different
functions such as seeing, hearing or thinking; but where is the self?
Is it one of those nāmas? The more we know different nāmas and rūpas by
experiencing their characteristics, the more will we see that
``self''
is only a concept; it is not a paramattha dhamma (absolute or ultimate
reality).

Nāmas are mental phenomena, rūpas are physical phenomena. Nāma and rūpa
are different types of realities. If we do not distinguish them from
each other and learn the characteristic of each we will continue to
take them for self. For example, hearing is nāma; it has no form or
shape, it has no ears. Hearing is different from earsense, but it has
earsense as a necessary condition. The nāma which hears experiences
sound. Earsense and sound are rūpas, they do not experience anything;
they are entirely different from the nāma which hears. If we do not
learn that hearing, earsense and sound are realities which are
altogether different from each other, we will continue to think that it
is self who hears. 

The Visuddhimagga (XVIII, 34) explains:

@quotation
Furthermore, nāma has no efficient power, it cannot occur by
its own efficient power@dots{}It does not eat, it does not
drink, it does not speak, it does not adopt postures. And
rūpa is without efficient power; it cannot occur by its own
efficient power. For it has no desire to eat, it has no
desire to drink, it has no desire to speak, it has no desire
to adopt postures. But it is when supported by rūpa
that nāma occurs; and it is when supported by nāma that rūpa
occurs. When nāma has the desire to eat, the desire to
drink, the desire to speak, the desire to adopt a posture,
it is rūpa that eats, drinks, speaks and adopts a
posture@enddots{}

@end quotation
Furthermore (XVIII, 36) we read:

@example

And just as men depend upon 
A boat for traversing the sea,
So does the mental body need
The matter-body for occurrence.

And as the boat depends upon
The men for traversing the sea,
So does the matter-body need
The mental body for occurrence. 

Depending each upon the other
The boat and men go on the sea.
And so do mind and matter both
Depend the one upon the other.

@end example

There are two kinds of conditioned nāma : @dfn{citta} (consciousness) and
@dfn{cetasika} (mental factors arising together with consciousness). They are
nāmas which arise because of conditions and fall away again. 

As regards citta, citta knows or experiences an object. Each citta has
its object, in Pāli: ārammaṇa. Knowing or experiencing an object does
not necessarily mean thinking about it. The citta which sees has what
is visible as object; it is different from the cittas which arise
afterwards, such as the cittas which know what it is that was perceived
and which think about it. The citta which hears (hearing-consciousness)
has sound as its object. Even when we are sound asleep and not
dreaming, citta experiences an object. There isn't any
citta without an object. There are many different types of citta which
can be classified in different ways.

Some cittas are @dfn{kusala} (wholesome), some are @dfn{akusala} (unwholesome).
Kusala cittas and akusala cittas are cittas which are cause; they can
motivate wholesome or unwholesome deeds through body, speech or mind
which are able to bring about their appropriate results. Some cittas
are the result of wholesome or unwholesome deeds; they are
vipākacittas. Some cittas are neither cause nor result; they are
@dfn{kiriyacittas} (sometimes translated as
``inoperative'')
@footnote{In chapter 3 and the following ones I will explain more
about akusala, kusala,  vipāka and kiriya.}. 

Cittas can be classified by way of jāti (jāti literally means ``birth'' or
``nature''). There are four jātis:

@itemize 

@item
@dfn{kusala}

@item
@dfn{akusala}

@item
@dfn{vipāka}

@item
@dfn{kiriya}

@end itemize

Both kusala vipāka (the result of a wholesome deed) and akusala vipāka
(the result of an unwholesome deed) are one jāti, the jāti of vipāka.

It is important to know which jāti a citta is. We cannot develop
wholesomeness in our life if we take akusala for kusala or if we take
akusala for vipāka. For instance, when someone speaks unpleasant words
to us, the moment of experiencing the sound (hearing-consciousness) is
akusala vipāka, the result of an unwholesome deed we performed
ourselves. But the aversion which may arise very shortly afterwards is
not vipāka, but it arises with akusala citta. We can learn to
distinguish these moments from each other by realizing their different
characteristics.

Another way of classifying citta is by plane of consciousness, in Pāli:
@dfn{bhūmi}. There are different planes of consciousness. The sensuous plane
of consciousness (kāmāvacara cittas) is the plane of sense-impressions,
which are: seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and the experiencing of
tangible object through the bodysense. On account of pleasant and
unpleasant objects experienced through the senses, kusala cittas
(wholesome cittas) and akusala cittas (unwholesome cittas) arise. There
are other planes of citta which do not experience sense-impressions.
Those who cultivate samatha (tranquil meditation) and attain absorption
(jhāna), have jhānacittas. The jhānacitta is another plane of citta; it
does not experience sense-impressions. The lokuttara citta
(``supramundane
consciousness'') is the highest plane
of consciousness because it is the citta which directly experiences
nibbāna. 

There are still other ways of classifying citta and if we consider the
different intensities of citta there are many more distinctions to be
made. For instance, @dfn{akusala} cittas, which are rooted in attachment
(@dfn{lobha}), aversion (@dfn{dosa}) and ignorance (@dfn{moha}), can be of many different
intensities. Sometimes they may motivate deeds, sometimes they may not,
depending on the degree of akusala. Kusala cittas too are of many
different intensities. It is useful to know different ways of
classification because in this way we learn about different aspects of
citta. There are altogether eighty-nine (or, in another classification,
hundred-and-twenty-one) types of citta @footnote{Cittas are classified
as 121 when one takes into account the lokuttara cittas of  those
who have cultivated both samatha and vipassanā and attain enlightenment
with lokuttara jhānacittas, lokuttara cittas accompanied by
jhāna-factors of different stages of jhāna, absorption. This will be
explained in chapter 23.}. If we develop our knowledge of cittas and if
we are aware of them when they appear, we will be less inclined to take
them for
''self''.

Cetasika is the second paramattha dhamma which is nāma. As we have seen,
citta experiences an object: seeing has what is visible as its object,
hearing has sound as its object, the citta which thinks experiences the
object it is thinking of. However, there is not only citta, there are
also mental factors, cetasikas, which accompany citta. One can think of
something with aversion, with pleasant feeling or with wisdom.
Aversion, feeling and wisdom are mental phenomena which are not citta;
they are cetasikas which accompany different cittas. There is only one
citta at a time, but there are several cetasikas arising together with
the citta and falling away together with the citta; citta never arises
alone. For example, feeling, in Pāli: @dfn{vedanā}, is a cetasika which
arises with every citta. Citta only knows or experiences its object; it
does not feel. Feeling, vedanā, however, has the function of feeling.
Feeling is sometimes pleasant, sometimes unpleasant. When we do not
have a pleasant or an unpleasant feeling, there is still feeling: at
that moment the feeling is neutral or indifferent. There is always
feeling; there isn't any moment of citta without
feeling. When, for example, seeing-consciousness arises, feeling arises
together with the citta. The citta which sees perceives only visible
object; there is not yet like or dislike. The feeling which accompanies
this type of citta is indifferent feeling. After seeing-consciousness
has fallen away, other cittas arise and there may be cittas which
dislike the object. The feeling which accompanies this type of citta is
unpleasant feeling. The function of citta is to cognize an object;
citta is the ``chief in
knowing''. Cetasikas share the same
object with the citta, but they each have their own specific quality
and function. Some cetasikas arise with every citta whereas others do
not @footnote{There are seven types of cetasika which have to arise
with every citta. }.

As we have seen, feeling, @dfn{vedanā} is a cetasika which arises with every
citta. Contact, in Pāli: @dfn{phassa}, is another cetasika which arises with
every citta; it
``contacts''
the object so that citta can experience it. Perception or remembrance,
in Pāli: @dfn{saññā}, is also a cetasika which arises with every citta. In
the Visuddhimagga (XIV, 130) we read that saññā has the function of
perceiving:

 
@quotation
@dots{}Its function is to make a sign as a condition for
perceiving again that ``this is the same'', as carpenters,
etc., do in the case of timber@enddots{}
@end quotation

Citta only experiences or cognizes an object; it does not
``mark'' the object. Saññā marks the object so that it can be recognized later.
Whenever we remember something it is saññā, not self, which remembers.
It is saññā which, for example, remembers that this colour is red, that
this is a house, or that this is the sound of a bird. 

There are also types of cetasika which do not arise with every citta.
Akusala (unwholesome) cetasikas arise only with akusala cittas. Sobhana
(beautiful) cetasikas @footnote{See chapter 19 for the meaning of
sobhana. Sobhana cittas include not only kusala cittas, but also
vipakacittas and kiriyacittas which are accompanied by sobhana
cetasikas.} arise with sobhana cittas. Lobha (attachment), dosa
(aversion) and moha (ignorance) are akusala cetasikas which arise only
with akusala cittas. For example, when we see something beautiful,
cittas with attachment to what we have seen may arise. The cetasika
which is lobha arises with the citta at that moment. Lobha has the
function of attachment or clinging. There are several other akusala
cetasikas which arise with akusala cittas, such as conceit (@dfn{māna}),
wrong view (@dfn{diṭṭhi}) and envy (@dfn{issā}). Sobhana cetasikas accompanying
wholesome cittas are for example @dfn{alobha} (generosity), @dfn{adosa} (loving
kindness), @dfn{amoha} (or @dfn{paññā}, wisdom). When we are generous alobha and
adosa arise with the kusala citta. Paññā, wisdom, may arise too with
the kusala citta, and moreover, there are other kinds of sobhana
cetasikas arising with the kusala citta as well. Defilements and
wholesome qualities are cetasikas, they are non-self. Altogether there
are fifty-two different cetasikas. 

Although citta and cetasika are both nāma, they each have different
characteristics. One may wonder how cetasikas can be experienced. When
we notice a change in citta, a characteristic of cetasika can be
experienced. For instance, when akusala cittas with stinginess arise
after kusala cittas with generosity have fallen away, we can notice a
change. Stinginess and generosity are cetasikas which can be
experienced; they have different characteristics. We may notice as well
the change from attachment to aversion, from pleasant feeling to
unpleasant feeling. Feeling is a cetasika we can experience, because
feeling is sometimes predominant and there are different kinds of
feeling. We can experience that unpleasant feeling is different from
pleasant feeling and from indifferent feeling. These different
cetasikas arise with different cittas and they fall away immediately,
together with the citta they accompany. If we know more about the
variety of citta and cetasika, it will help us to see the truth.

Since citta and cetasika arise together it is difficult to experience
the difference in their characteristics. The Buddha was able to
directly experience the different characteristics of all cittas and
cetasikas because his wisdom was of the highest degree. We read in the
Questions of King Milinda (Book III,
``The Removal of
Difficulties'', chapter 7, 87
@footnote{I am using the translation by T.W. Rhys Davids, Part I,
Dover Publications, New  York.}) that the arahat Nāgasena said to
King Milinda:

@quotation

``A hard thing there is, O King, which the Blessed One has
done.'' ``And what is that?'' ``The fixing of all those
mental conditions which depend on one organ of sense,
telling us that such is contact, such is feeling, such is
saññā (perception), such is volition and such is citta.''
``Give me an illustration.'' ``Suppose, O King, a man were
to wade down into the sea, and taking some water in the palm
of his hand, were to taste it with his tongue. Would he
distinguish whether it were water from the Ganges, or from
the Jamunā, or from the Aciravatī, or from the Sarabhū, or
from the Mahī?'' ``Impossible, Sir.'' ``More difficult than
that, great King, is it to have distinguished between the
mental conditions which follow on the exercise of any one of
the organs of sense!''

@end quotation

Citta and cetasika are @dfn{paramattha} dhammas (absolute realities) which
each have their own unchangeable characteristic. These characteristics
can be experienced, regardless how one names them. Paramattha dhammas
are not words or concepts, they are realities. Pleasant feeling and
unpleasant feeling are real; their characteristics can be experienced
without having to call them ``pleasant
feeling'' or
``unpleasant
feeling''. Aversion is real; it can
be experienced when it presents itself.

There are not only mental phenomena, there are also physical phenomena.
Physical phenomena or rūpa are the third paramattha dhamma. There are
several kinds of rūpas which each have their own characteristic
@footnote{There are twenty-eight classes of rūpa in all.}. There are
four principle rūpas which are called the Great Elements (in Pāli:
mahā-bhūta-rūpa). They are:

@itemize 

@item
Element of Earth or solidity (to be experienced 
as hardness or softness)

@item
Element of Water or cohesion 

@item
Element of Fire or temperature (to be experienced
as heat or cold)

@item
Element of Wind or motion (to be experienced as
oscillation or pressure) 

@end itemize

These ``Great Elements'' are the principle rūpas which arise together
with all the other kinds of rūpa, which are the derived rūpas (in
Pāli: upādā-rūpa). Rūpas never arise alone; they arise in ``groups''
or ``units''.  There have to be at least eight kinds of rūpa arising
together. For example, whenever the rūpa which is temperature arises,
solidity, cohesion, motion and other rūpas have to arise as well.
``Derived rūpas'' are, for example, the physical sense-organs of
eyesense, earsense, smellingsense, tastingsense and bodysense, and the
sense-objects of visible object, sound, odour and flavour. 

Different characteristics of rūpa can be experienced through eyes,
ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. These characteristics are real
since they can be experienced. We use conventional terms such as
``body'' and ``table''; both have the characteristic of hardness which
can be experienced through touch. In this way we can prove that the
characteristic of hardness is the same, no matter whether it is in the
body or in the table. Hardness is a paramattha dhamma; ``body'' and
``table'' are not paramattha dhammas but only concepts. We take it for
granted that the body stays and we take it for ``self'', but what we
call ``body'' are only different rūpas arising and falling away. The
conventional term ``body'' may delude us about reality. We will know
the truth if we learn to experience different characteristics of rūpa
when they appear.

Citta, cetasika and rūpa only arise when there are the right conditions,
they are conditioned dhammas (in Pāli: saṅkhāra dhammas @footnote{Saṅkhāra dhammas are conditioned dhammas that arise together depending
on each other. The Pāli term “saṅkhata” is also used. Saṅkhata means
what has been put together, composed by a combination of factors.
Saṅkhata dhamma is what has arisen because of conditions.}). Seeing
cannot arise when there is no eyesense and when there is no visible
object; these are necessary conditions for its arising. Sound can only
arise when there are the right conditions for its arising. When it has
arisen it falls away again. Everything which arises because of
conditions has to fall away again when the conditions have ceased. One
may think that sound stays, but what we take for a long, lasting moment
of sound are actually many different rūpas succeeding one another. 

The fourth paramattha dhamma is @dfn{nibbāna}. Nibbāna is a paramattha dhamma
because it is real. Nibbāna can be experienced through the mind-door if
one follows the right Path leading towards it: the development of the
wisdom which sees things as they are. Nibbāna is nāma. However, it is
not citta or cetasika, paramattha dhammas which arise because of
conditions and fall way. Nibbāna is the nāma which is an unconditioned
reality @footnote{In Pāli: asaṅkhata: not conditioned, the opposite of
saṅkhata. In the Dhammasangaṇi nibbāna is referred to as asaṅkhatā
dhatu, the unconditioned element. Sometimes the term visaṅkhāra dhamma,
the dhamma which is not saṅkhāra (vi is negation), is used.}; therefore
it does not arise and it does not fall away. Citta and cetasika are
nāmas which experience an object; nibbāna is the nāma which does not
experience an object, but nibbāna itself can be the object of citta and
cetasika which experience it. Nibbāna is not a person, it is non-self,
anattā. 

Summarising the four paramattha dhammas, they are:

@itemize 

@item
citta  

@item
cetasika

@item
rūpa

@item
nibbāna

@end itemize

When we study Dhamma it is essential to know which paramattha dhamma
such or such reality is. If we do not know this we may be misled by
conventional terms. We should, for example, know that what we call
``body''
are actually different rūpa-paramattha dhammas, not citta or cetasika.
We should know that nibbāna is not citta or cetasika, but the fourth
paramattha dhamma. Nibbāna is the end of all conditioned realities
which arise and fall away: for the arahat, the perfected one, who
passes away, there is no more rebirth, no more nāmas and rūpas which
arise and fall away. 

@itemize 

@item
All conditioned dhammas, citta, cetasika and rūpa, are impermanent,
``anicca''.

@item
All conditioned dhammas are
``dukkha''; they are
``suffering'' or unsatisfactory, since they are impermanent.

@item
All dhammas are non-self, ``anattā''
(in Pāli: sabbe dhammā anattā, Dhammapada, vs. 279).

@end itemize
Thus, the conditioned dhammas, not nibbāna, are impermanent and dukkha.
But all dhammas, that is, the four paramattha dhammas, nibbāna
included, have the characteristic of anattā, non-self.

@heading Questions

@enumerate 
@item 
What is the difference between nāma and rūpa?

@item
What is the difference between citta and cetasika?

@item
Do cetasikas experience an object?

@item
Is there more than one cetasika arising together
with the citta?

@item
Can nibbāna experience an object?

@item
Is nibbāna a “self''?

@end enumerate    

@node The Five Khandhas
@chapter The Five Khandhas

The Buddha discovered the truth of all phenomena. He knew the
characteristic of each phenomenon by his own experience. Out of
compassion he taught other people to see reality in many different
ways, so that they would have a deeper understanding of the phenomena
in and around themselves. When realities are classified by way of
paramattha dhammas (absolute realities), they are classified as: 

@itemize

@item
citta

@item
cetasika

@item
rūpa

@item
nibbāna

@end itemize

Citta, cetasika and rūpa are conditioned realities (saṅkhāra dhammas).
They arise because of conditions and fall away again; they are
impermanent. One paramattha dhamma, nibbāna, is an unconditioned
reality (asaṅkhata dhamma); it does not arise and fall away. All four
paramattha dhammas are anattā, non-self.

Citta, cetasika and rūpa, the conditioned realities, can be classified
by way of the five khandhas. @dfn{Khandha} means
``group''
or
``aggregate''.
What is classified as khandha arises because of conditions and falls
away again. The five khandhas are not different from the three
paramattha dhammas which are citta, cetasika and rūpa. Realities can be
classified in many different ways and thus different names are given to
them. The five khandhas are:

@itemize

@item
@dfn{Rūpakkhandha}, which are all physical phenomena 

@item
@dfn{Vedanākkhandha}, which is feeling (vedanā)

@item
@dfn{Saññākkhandha}, which is remembrance or  ``perception''
(saññā)

@item
@dfn{Saṅkhārakkhandha}, comprising fifty cetasikas (mental factors arising with the citta)

@item
@dfn{Viññāṇakkhandha}, comprising all cittas (89 or 121)@footnote{See chapter
1.}

@end itemize

As regards the fifty-two kinds of cetasika which may arise with citta,
they are classified as three khandhas: the cetasika which is feeling
(vedanā) is classified as one khandha, the vedanākkhandha; the cetasika
which is remembrance or
``perception''
(saññā) is classified as one khandha, the saññākkhandha; as regards the
other fifty cetasikas, they are classified altogether as one khandha,
the saṅkhārakkhandha. For example, in saṅkhārakkhandha are included the
following cetasikas: volition or intention (cetanā), attachment
(lobha), aversion (dosa), ignorance (moha), loving kindness (mettā),
generosity (alobha) and wisdom (paññā). All defilements and all good
qualities are included in saṅkhārakkhandha, they are impermanent not
``self''.
Saṅkhārakkhandha is sometimes translated as
``activities''
or ``mental
formations''@footnote{Saṅkhāra has
different meanings in different contexts. Saṅkhāra dhamma comprises all conditioned realities. Saṅkhārakkhandha comprises fifty
cetasikas.}

As regards citta, all cittas are one khandha: viññāṇakkhandha. The Pāli
terms viññāṇa, mano and citta are three terms for the same reality:
that which has the characteristic of knowing or experiencing something.
When citta is classified as khandha the word viññāṇa is used. Thus, one
khandha is rūpakkhandha and the other four khandhas are nāmakkhandhas.
Three nāmakkhandhas are cetasika and one nāmakkhandha is citta.

Anything which is khandha does not last; as soon as it has arisen it
falls away again. Although khandhas arise and fall away, they are real;
we can experience them when they present themselves. Nibbāna, the
unconditioned dhamma which does not arise and fall away, is not a
khandha. 

The Visuddhimagga (XX, 96) explains about the arising and falling away
of nāma and rūpa:

@quotation

There is no heap or store of unarisen nāma-rūpa (existing) prior to its
arising. When it arises it does not come from any heap or store; and
when it ceases, it does not go in any direction. There is nowhere any
depository in the way of heap or store or hoard of what has ceased. But
just as there is no store, prior to its arising, of the sound that
arises when a lute is played, nor does it come from any store when it
arises, nor does it go in any direction when it ceases, nor does it
persist as a store when it has ceased
(``Kindred
Sayings'' IV, 197), but on the
contrary, not having been, it is brought into being owing to the lute,
the lute's neck, and the man's
appropriate effort, and having been, it vanishes  @minus{} so too all material
and immaterial states (rūpa and nāma), not having been, are brought
into being, having been, they vanish.

@end quotation

The khandhas are realities which can be experienced. We experience
rūpakkhandha when, for example, we feel hardness. This phenomenon does
not stay; it arises and falls away. Rūpakkhandha is impermanent. Not
only rūpas of the body, but the other physical phenomena are included
in rūpakkhandha as well. For example, sound is rūpakkhandha; it arises
and falls away, it is impermanent.

Vedanākkhandha (feeling) is real; we can experience feelings.
Vedanākkhandha comprises all kinds of feelings. Feeling can be
classified in different ways. Sometimes feelings are classified as
threefold:

@itemize

@item
pleasant feeling

@item
unpleasant feeling

@item
indifferent feeling

@end itemize

Sometimes they are classified as fivefold. In addition to pleasant
feeling, unpleasant feeling and indifferent feeling there are:

@itemize

@item
pleasant bodily feeling

@item
painful bodily feeling

@end itemize

Bodily feeling is feeling which has bodysense, the rūpa which has the
capacity to receive bodily impressions, as condition; the feeling
itself is nāma, but it has rūpa (bodysense) as condition. When an
object contacts the bodysense, the feeling is either painful or
pleasant; there is no indifferent bodily feeling. When the bodily
feeling is painful it is akusala vipāka (the result of an unwholesome
deed), and when the bodily feeling is pleasant it is kusala vipāka (the
result of a wholesome deed).

Since there are many different moments of feeling arising and falling
away it is difficult to distinguish them from each other. For instance,
we are inclined to confuse pleasant bodily feeling which is vipāka and
the pleasant feeling which may arise shortly afterwards together with
attachment to that pleasant bodily feeling. Or we may confuse painful
bodily feeling and unpleasant feeling which may arise afterwards
together with aversion. When there is bodily pain, the painful feeling
is vipāka, it accompanies the vipākacitta which experiences the
unpleasant object impinging on the bodysense @footnote{The experiences
through the senses which are seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting 
and body-consciousness are vipākacittas, the results of kamma. When
these cittas  experience a pleasant object they are kusala vipāka,
the result of kusala kamma, and when they experience an unpleasant
object they are akusala vipāka, the result of akusala kamma.}.
Unpleasant (mental) feeling may arise afterwards; it is not vipāka, but
it accompanies the akusala citta with aversion, and thus it is akusala.
The akusala citta with aversion arises because of our accumulated
aversion (dosa). Though bodily feeling and mental feeling are both
nāma, they are entirely different kinds of feelings, arising because of
different conditions. When there are no more conditions for dosa there
can still be painful bodily feeling, but there is no longer unpleasant
(mental) feeling. The arahat, the perfected one who has eradicated all
defilements, may still have akusala vipāka so long as his life has not
terminated yet, but he has no aversion.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (I, Sagāthā-vagga, the Māra-suttas,
chapter II, paragraph 3, The Splinter):

@quotation

Thus have I heard: The Exalted One was once staying at Rājagaha, in the
Maddakucchi, at the Deer-preserve. Now at that time his foot was
injured by a splinter. Sorely indeed did the Exalted One feel it,
grievous the pains he suffered in the body, keen and sharp, acute,
distressing and unwelcome. He truly bore them, mindful and deliberate,
nor was he cast down@enddots{}

@end quotation

Feelings are sixfold when they are classified by way of the contacts
occurring through the six doors: there is feeling which arises because
of what is experienced through the eyes, the ears, the nose, the
tongue, the bodysense and the mind. All these feelings are different;
they arise because of different conditions. Feeling arises and falls
away together with the citta it accompanies and thus at each moment
feeling is different. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Part II, Kindred
Sayings about Feeling, paragraph 8, Sickness II) that the Buddha said to the
monks:

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, a monk should meet his end collected and composed. This is
our instruction to you.

@dots{}Now, monks, as that monk dwells collected, composed, earnest,
ardent, strenuous, there arises in him feeling that is pleasant, and he
thus understands: ``There is arisen in
me this pleasant feeling. Now that is owing to something, not without
cause. It is owing to this contact. Now this contact is impermanent,
compounded, arisen owing to something. Owing to this impermanent
contact which has so arisen, this pleasant feeling has arisen: How can
that be permanent?'' Thus he dwells
contemplating the impermanence in contact and pleasant feeling,
contemplating their transience, their waning, their ceasing, the giving
of them up. Thus as he dwells contemplating their impermanence@dots{}the
lurking tendency to lust for contact and pleasant feeling is abandoned
in him.

So also as regards contact and painful feeling@dots{}contact and neutral
feeling@enddots{}

@end quotation

There are still many more ways of classifying feelings. If we know about
different ways of classifying feelings it will help us to realize that
feeling is only a mental phenomenon which arises because of conditions.
We are inclined to cling to feeling which has fallen away, instead of
being aware of the reality of the present moment as it appears through
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense or mind. In the passage of the
Visuddhimagga which was quoted above (XX, 96) nāma and rūpa are
compared to the sound of a lute which does not come from any
``store''
when it arises, nor goes in any direction when it ceases, nor persists
as a
``store''
when it has ceased. However, we cling so much to feelings that we do
not realize that the feeling which has fallen away does not exist any
more, that it has ceased completely. Vedanākkhandha (feeling) is
impermanent.

Saññākkhandha (perception) is real; it can be experienced whenever we
remember something. Saññā accompanies every moment of citta. Each citta
which arises experiences an object and saññā which arises with the
citta remembers and
``marks''
that object so that it can be recognized. Even when there is a moment
that one does not recognize something citta still experiences an object
and saññā which arises with the citta
``marks''
that object. Saññā arises and falls away with the citta; saññā is
impermanent. So long as we do not see saññā as it really is: only a
mental phenomenon which falls away as soon as it has arisen, we will
take saññā for self.

Saṅkhārakkhandha (all the cetasikas other than vedanā and saññā) is
real; it can be experienced. When beautiful mental factors (sobhana
cetasikas) arise, such as generosity and compassion, or when
unwholesome mental factors arise, such as anger and stinginess, we can
experience saṅkhārakkhandha. All these phenomena arise and fall away;
saṅkhārakkhandha is impermanent.

Viññāṇakkhandha (citta) is real; we can experience it when there is
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, experiencing tangible object
through the bodysense or thinking. Viññāṇakkhandha arises and falls
away; it is impermanent. All saṅkhāra dhammas (conditioned phenomena),
that is, the five khandhas, are impermanent.

Sometimes the khandhas are called the
``khandhas of
clinging'' (in Pāli:
upādānakkhandha). Those who are not arahats still cling to the
khandhas. We take the body for self; thus we cling to rūpakkhandha. We
take mentality for self; thus we cling to vedanākkhandha, to
saññākkhandha, to saṅkhārakkhandha and to viññāṇakkhandha. If we cling
to the khandhas and do not see them as they are, we will have sorrow.
So long as the khandhas are still objects of clinging for us, we are
like people afflicted by sickness.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khandha-vagga, the First Fifty,
paragraph 1, Nakulapitar) that the housefather Nakulapitar, who was an
old, sick man, came to see the Buddha at Crocodile Haunt in the
Deerpark. The Buddha said to him that he should train himself thus:

@quotation

``Though my body is sick, my mind shall
not be sick.''

@end quotation

Later on Sāriputta gave him a further explanation of the
Buddha's words:

@quotation

Herein, housefather, the untaught many-folk@dots{}who are unskilled in the
worthy doctrine, untrained in the worthy doctrine  @minus{} these regard body
as the self, they regard the self as having body, body as being in the
self, the self as being in the body.
``I am the
body'', they say,
``body is
mine'', and are possessed by this
idea; and so, possessed by this idea, when body alters and changes,
owing to the unstable and changeable nature of the body, then sorrow and
grief, woe, lamentation and despair arise in them. They regard feeling
(vedanā) as the self@dots{}They regard perception (saññā) as the self@enddots{}
They regard the activities (saṅkhārakkhandha) as the self@dots{}They
regard consciousness (viññāṇa) as the self@dots{}That, housefather, is how
body is sick and mind is sick too.

And how is body sick, but mind is not sick?

Herein, housefather, the well-taught ariyan disciple@dots{}regards not body
as the self, regards not the self as having body, nor body as being in
the self, nor self as being in the body. He says not
``I am
body'', he says not
``body is
mine'', nor is possessed by this
idea. As he is not so possessed, when body alters and changes owing to
the unstable and changeable nature of body, then sorrow and grief, woe,
lamentation and despair do not arise in him. He regards not feeling
(vedanā) as the self@dots{}He regards not perception (saññā) as the
self@dots{}He regards not the activities (saṅkhārakkhandha) as the self@enddots{}
He regards not consciousness (viññāṇa) as the self@dots{}Thus,
housefather, body is sick, but mind is not sick.

@end quotation

So long as we are still clinging to the khandhas we are like sick
people, but we can be cured of our sickness if we see the khandhas as
they are. The khandhas are impermanent and thus they are dukkha
(unsatisfactory). We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khandha-vagga,
Last Fifty, paragraph 104, Suffering) that the Buddha taught to the monks the
four noble Truths: the Truth of dukkha, the Truth of the arising of
dukkha, the Truth of the ceasing of dukkha, the Truth of the way
leading to the ceasing of dukkha. He said:

@quotation

Monks, I will teach you dukkha @footnote{In the English translation
“dukkha” is sometimes translated as “suffering”, sometimes as
“ill”. Here the English text uses the word “suffering”.}, the arising
of dukkha, the ceasing of dukkha, the way leading to the ceasing of
dukkha. Do you listen to it. 

And what, monks, is dukkha? It is to be called the five khandhas of
grasping. What five? The rūpakkhandha of grasping, the vedanākkhandha
of grasping, the saññākkhandha of grasping, the saṅkhārakkhandha of
grasping, the viññāṇakkhandha of grasping. This, monks, is called
dukkha. 

And what, monks, is the arising of dukkha? It is that craving@dots{}that
leads downward to rebirth@dots{}the craving for feeling, for rebirth, for
no rebirth@dots{}This, monks, is called the arising of dukkha.

And what, monks, is the ceasing of dukkha? It is the utter passionless
ceasing, the giving up, the abandonment of, the release from, the
freedom from attachment to that craving@enddots{}

This, monks, is called the ceasing of dukkha.

And what, monks, is the way going to the ceasing of dukkha? 

It is the ariyan eightfold Path@dots{}This, monks, is the way going to the
ceasing of dukkha.

@end quotation

So long as we still cling to the khandhas they will arise at rebirth,
and this means sorrow. If we develop the eightfold Path, the
development of right understanding of realities, we will learn to see
what the khandhas really are. Then we are on the way leading to the
ceasing of dukkha, which means: no more birth, old age, sickness and
death. Those who have attained the last stage of enlightenment, the
stage of the arahat, will be, after their life-span is over, free from
the khandhas.

@heading Questions 

@enumerate

@item
Which paramattha dhammas are nāma?

@item
Which paramattha dhammas are saṅkhāra dhamma (conditioned realities)?

@item
Which paramattha dhamma is the unconditioned reality?

@item
Which saṅkhāra dhammas are nāma?

@item
Are all cetasikas saṅkhārakkhandha?

@item
Is vedanā cetasika (feeling) a khandha?

@item
Is saññā cetasika (remembrance or perception) a khandha?

@item
Is painful bodily feeling vipāka?

@item
Is unhappy mental feeling vipāka?

@item
Which khandhas are nāma?

@item
Is seeing-consciousness a khandha?

@item
Is the concept ``human
being'' a khandha?

@item
Is sound a khandha?

@item
Which paramattha dhammas are khandha? 

@end enumerate

@node Different Aspects of Citta
@chapter Different Aspects of Citta

The Buddha spoke about everything which is real. What he taught can be
proved by our own experience. However, we do not really know the most
common realities of daily life: the mental phenomena and physical
phenomena which appear through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and
mind. It seems that we are mostly interested in the past or the future.
However, we will find out what life really is if we know more about the
realities of the present moment, and if we learn to be aware of them
when they appear.

The Buddha explained that citta (consciousness) is a reality. We may
doubt whether cittas are real. How can we prove that there are cittas?
Could it be that there are only physical phenomena and not mental
phenomena? There are many things in our life we take for granted such
as our homes, meals, clothes, or the tools we use every day. These
things do not appear by themselves. They are brought about by a
thinking mind, by citta.@dfn{Citta} is a mental phenomenon; it knows or
experiences something. Citta is not like a physical phenomenon which
does not experience anything. We listen to music which was written by a
composer. It was citta which had the idea for the music; it was citta
which made the composer's hand move in order to write
down the notes. His hand could not have moved without citta.

Citta can achieve many different effects. We read in the Atthasālinī
(the commentary to the Dhammasangaṇi, the first book of the Abhidhamma)
Book I, Part II, Analysis of Terms, 64:

@quotation

How is consciousness (i.e. mind) capable of producing a variety or
diversity of effects in action? There is no art in the world more
variegated than the art of painting. In painting, the
painter's masterpiece is more artistic than the rest
of his pictures. An artistic design occurs to the painters of
masterpieces that such and such pictures should be drawn in such and
such a way. Through this artistic design there arise operations of the
mind (or artistic operations) accomplishing such things as sketching
the outline, putting on the paint, touching up, and embellishing@enddots{}
Thus all classes of arts in the world, specific or generic, are
achieved by the mind. And owing to its capacity thus to produce a
variety or diversity of effects in action, the mind, which achieves all
these arts, is in itself artistic like the arts themselves. Nay, it is
even more artistic than the art itself, because the latter cannot
execute every design perfectly. For that reason the Blessed One has
said, ``Monks, have you seen a
masterpiece of painting?''
``Yes,
Lord.''
``Monks, that masterpiece of art is
designed by the mind. Indeed, monks, the mind is even more artistic
than that masterpiece.'' (Kindred
Sayings, III, 151)

@end quotation

We then read about the many different things which are accomplished by
citta: good deeds, such as deeds of generosity, and bad deeds, such as
deeds of cruelty and deceit, are accomplished by citta and these deeds
produce different results. There is not just one type of citta, but
there are many different types of cittas.

Different people react differently to what they experience, thus,
different types of citta arise. What one person likes, another
dislikes. We can also notice how different people are when they make or
produce something. Even when two people plan to make the same thing the
result is quite different. For example, when two people make a painting
of the same tree, the paintings are not at all the same. People have
different talents and capacities; some people have no difficulty with
their studies, whereas others are incapable of study. Cittas are beyond
control; they each have their own conditions for their arising.

Why are people so different from one another? The reason is that they
accumulate different inclinations. When a child has been taught from
his youth to be generous he accumulates generosity. People who are
angry very often accumulate a great deal of anger. We all have
accumulated different inclinations, tastes and skills.

Each citta which arises falls away completely and is succeeded by the
next citta. How then can there be accumulation of good and bad
inclinations? The reason is that each citta which falls away is
succeeded by the next citta. Our life is an uninterrupted series of
cittas and each citta conditions the next citta and this again the
next, and thus the past can condition the present. It is a fact that
our good cittas and bad cittas in the past condition our inclinations
today. Thus, good and bad inclinations are accumulated.

We all have accumulated many impure inclinations and defilements (in
Pāli: kilesa). Defilements are for example greed or attachment (lobha),
anger (dosa) and ignorance (moha). There are different degrees of
defilements: there are subtle defilements or latent tendencies, medium
defilements and gross defilements. Subtle defilements do not appear
with the citta, but they are latent tendencies which are accumulated
and lie dormant in the citta. At the time we are asleep and not
dreaming, there are no akusala cittas but there are unwholesome latent
tendencies. When we wake up akusala cittas arise again. How could they
appear if there were not in each citta accumulated unwholesome latent
tendencies? Even when the citta is not akusala there are unwholesome
latent tendencies so long as they have not been eradicated by wisdom.
Medium defilement is different from subtle defilement since it arises
together with the citta. Medium defilement arises with akusala cittas
rooted in attachment, lobha, aversion, dosa, and ignorance, moha.
Medium defilement is, for example, attachment to what one sees, hears
or experiences through the bodysense, or aversion towards the objects
one experiences. Medium defilement does not motivate ill deeds. Gross
defilement motivates unwholesome actions, akusala kamma, through body,
speech and mind, such as killing, slandering or the intention to take
away other people's possessions. @dfn{Kamma} is actually
volition or intention; it can motivate good deeds or bad deeds. Kamma
is a mental phenomenon and thus it can be accumulated. People
accumulate different defilements and different kammas. 

Different accumulations of kamma are the condition for different results
in life. This is the law of kamma and vipāka, of cause and result. We
see that people are born into different circumstances. Some people live
in agreeable surroundings and they have many pleasant experiences in
their lives. Other people may often have disagreeable experiences; they
are poor or they suffer from ill health. When we hear about children
who suffer from malnutrition, we wonder why they have to suffer whereas
other children receive everything they need. The Buddha taught that
everyone receives the results of his own deeds. A deed or kamma of the
past can bring about its result later on, because akusala kamma and
kusala kamma are accumulated. When there are the right conditions the
result can be brought about in the form of @dfn{vipāka}. When the word
``result''
is used, people may think of the consequences of their deeds for other
people, but
``result''
in the sense of vipāka has a different meaning. Vipākacitta is a citta
which experiences an unpleasant object or a pleasant object and this
citta is the result of a deed we did ourselves. We are used to thinking
of a self who experiences unpleasant and pleasant things. However,
there is no self; there are only cittas which experience different
objects. Some cittas are cause; they can motivate good deeds or bad
deeds which are capable of bringing about their appropriate results.
Some cittas are result or vipāka. When we see something unpleasant, it
is not self who sees; it is a citta, seeing-consciousness, which is the
result of an unwholesome deed (akusala kamma) we performed either in
this life or in a past life. This kind of citta is akusala vipāka. When
we see something pleasant, it is a citta which is kusala vipāka, the
result of a wholesome deed we performed. Every time we experience an
unpleasant object through one of the five senses, there is akusala
vipāka. Every time we experience a pleasant object through one of the
five senses there is kusala vipāka.

If one is being hit by someone else, the pain one feels is not the vipāka
(result) of the deed performed by the other person. The person who is being hit
receives the result of a bad deed he performed himself; for him there is akusala
vipāka through the bodysense. The other person's action is the proximate cause
of his pain. As regards the other person who performs the bad deed, it is his
akusala citta which motivates that deed. Sooner or later he will receive the
result of his own bad deed. When we have more understanding of kamma and vipāka
we will see many events of our life more clearly.

The Atthasālinī (Book I, Analysis of Terms, Part II, 65) explains that
kamma of different people causes different results at birth and
throughout life. Even bodily features are the result of kamma. We read:

@quotation
@dots{}In dependence on the difference in kamma appears the difference in the
destiny of beings without legs, with two legs, four legs, many legs, vegetative,
spiritual, with perception, without perception, with neither perception nor
without perception. Depending on the difference in kamma appears the difference
in the births of beings, high and low, base and exalted, happy and miserable.
Depending on the difference in kamma appears the difference in the individual
features of beings as beautiful or ugly, high-born or low-born, well-built or
deformed. Depending on the difference in kamma appears the difference in the
worldly conditions of beings as gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and
praise, happiness and misery.
@end quotation

Further on we read: (``Sutta Nipāta'', 654)

@example
By kamma the world moves, by kamma men 
Live, and by kamma are all beings bound 
As by its pin the rolling chariot wheel.
@end example

The Buddha taught that everything arises because of conditions; it is
not by chance that people are so different in bodily features and
character, and that they live in such different circumstances. Even the
difference in bodily features of animals is due to different kamma.
Animals have citta too; they may behave badly or they may behave well.
Thus they accumulate different kammas which produce different results.
If we understand that each kamma brings about its own result, we will
know that there is no reason to be proud if we are born into a rich
family or if we receive praise, honour or other pleasant things. When
we have to suffer we will understand that suffering is due to our own
deeds. Thus we will be less inclined to blame other people for our
unhappiness or to be jealous when others receive pleasant things. When
we understand reality we know that it is not self who receives
something pleasant or who has to suffer; it is only vipāka, a citta
which arises because of conditions and which falls away immediately.

We see that people who are born into the same circumstances still behave
differently. For example, among people who are born into rich families,
some are stingy, others are not. The fact that one is born into a rich
family is the result of kamma. Stinginess is conditioned by
one's accumulated defilements. There are many
different types of conditions which play their part in the life of each
person. Kamma causes one to be born into certain circumstances and
one's accumulated tendencies condition
one's character.

One may have doubts about past lives and future lives, since one only
experiences the present life. However, in the present life we notice
that different people experience different results. These results must
have their causes in the past. The past conditions the present and the
deeds we perform now will bring about their results in the future. In
understanding the present we will be able to know more about the past
and the future.

Past, present and future lives are an uninterrupted series of cittas.
Each citta which arises falls away immediately to be succeeded by the
next citta. Cittas do not last, but there isn't any
moment without citta. If there were moments without citta the body
would be a dead body. Even when we are sound asleep there is citta.
Just as each citta that falls away is succeeded by the next citta,
even so the last citta of this life is succeeded by the first citta of
the next life, the rebirth-consciousness. Therefore, accumulations can
continue on from one citta to the next citta, from life to life. Thus
we see that life goes on and on. We are moving in a cycle, the cycle of
birth and death.

The next citta cannot arise until the previous citta has passed away.
There can be only one citta at a time, but cittas arise and fall away
so rapidly that one has the impression that there can be more than one
citta at a time. We may think that we can see and hear at the same
time, but in reality each of these cittas arises at a different moment.
We can verify through our own experience that seeing is a type of citta
which is different from hearing; these cittas arise because of
different conditions and experience different objects.

A citta is that which experiences something; it experiences an object.
Each citta must experience an object, there cannot be any citta without
an object. Cittas experience different objects through the six doors of
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. Seeing is a citta
experiencing that which appears through the eyes. We can use the word
``visible
object'' for the object which is seen
but it is not necessary to name it
``visible
object''. When visible object
contacts the eyesense there are conditions for seeing. Seeing is
different from thinking about what we see; the latter is a type of
citta which experiences something through the mind-door. Hearing is a
citta which is different from seeing; it has different conditions and
it experiences a different object. When sound contacts the earsense,
there are conditions for a citta which experiences sound. There have to
be the right conditions for the arising of each citta. We cannot smell
through the ears and taste with the eyes. A citta which smells
experiences odour through the nose. A citta which tastes experiences
flavour through the tongue. A citta which experiences tangible object
experiences this through the bodysense. Through the mind-door cittas
are able to experience all kinds of objects. There can be only one
citta at a time and citta can experience only one object at a time.

We may understand in theory that a citta which sees has a characteristic
which is different from a citta which hears, and that citta is
different from a physical phenomenon which does not experience
anything. Knowing this may seem quite simple to us, but theoretical
knowledge is different from knowing the truth by one's
own experience. Theoretical knowledge is not very deep; it cannot
eradicate the concept of self. Only in being aware of phenomena as they
appear through the six doors, will we know the truth by our own
experience. This kind of understanding can eradicate the concept of
self. 

The objects which we experience are the world in which we live. At the
moment we see, the world is visible object. The world of visible object
does not last, it falls away immediately. When we hear, the world is
sound, but it falls away again. We are absorbed in and infatuated with
the objects we experience through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense
and mind-door, but not one of these objects lasts. What is impermanent
should not be taken for self.

In the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Fours, chapter V, paragraph 5, Rohitassa) we
read that Rohitassa, a deva, asked the Buddha about reaching the
world's end. He said to the Buddha:

@quotation

``Pray, lord, is it possible for us, by
going, to know, to see, to reach world's end, where
there is no more being born or growing old, no more dying, no more
falling (from one existence) and rising up (in
another)?'' 

``Your reverence, where there is no more
being born or growing old, no more dying, no more falling from one
existence and rising up in another, I declare that end of the world is
not by going to be known, seen or
reached.''

``It is wonderful, lord! It is
marvellous, lord, how well it is said by the Exalted One:
`Where there is no more being born@dots{}that end of the
world is not by going to be known, seen or reached!'

Formerly, lord, I was the hermit called Rohitassa,
Bhoja's son, one of psychic power, a skywalker@dots{}The
extent of my stride was as the distance between the eastern and the
western ocean. To me, lord, possessed of such speed and of such a
stride, there came a longing thus: I will reach the
world's end by going. 

But, lord, not to speak of (the time spent over) food and drink, eating,
tasting and calls of nature, not to speak of struggles to banish sleep
and weariness, though my life-span was a hundred years, though I
travelled a hundred years, yet I reached not world's
end but died ere that. Wonderful indeed, lord! Marvellous it is, lord,
how well it has been said by the Exalted One: `Your
reverence, where there is no more being born@dots{}that end of the world
is not by going to be known, seen or
reached.'''

``But your reverence, I declare not that
there is any making an end of ill (dukkha) without reaching the
world's end. Nay, your reverence, in this very
fathom-long body, along with its perceptions and thoughts, I proclaim
the world to be, likewise the origin of the world and the making of the
world to end, likewise the practice going to the ending of the world.

@end quotation

@example

Not to be reached by going is world's end.
Yet there is no release for man from ill
Unless he reach the world's end. Then let a man
Become world-knower, wise, world-ender,
Let him be one who lives the holy life @footnote{In Pāli:
brahmacariya.}. 
Knowing the world's end by becoming calmed
He longs not for this world or another.''

@end example

The Buddha taught people about the ``world'' and the way to reach the end of the
world, that is, the end of suffering, dukkha. The way to realize this is knowing
the world, that is, knowing ``this very fathom-long body, along with its
perceptions and thoughts'', knowing oneself.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
People are born into different circumstances: some are born rich,
others are born poor. What is the cause of this?

@item
People behave differently: some are stingy, others are generous. By
what is this conditioned?

@item
Each citta which arises falls away completely. How is it possible
that defilements can be accumulated?

@end enumerate

@node The Characteristic of Lobha
@chapter The Characteristic of Lobha

Cittas are of different types. They can be classified as kusala cittas
(wholesome cittas), akusala cittas (unwholesome cittas), vipākacittas
(cittas which are result) and kiriyacittas (cittas which are neither
cause nor result). All these kinds of cittas arise in a day, yet we
know so little about them. Most of the time we do not know whether the
citta is kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. If we learn to classify our
mind we will have more understanding of ourselves and of others. We
will have more compassion and loving kindness towards others, even when
they behave in a disagreeable way. We do not like the akusala cittas of
others; we find it unpleasant when they are stingy or speak harsh
words. However, do we realize at which moments we ourselves have
akusala cittas? When we dislike other people's harsh
words, we ourselves have akusala cittas with aversion at that moment.
Instead of paying attention to the akusala cittas of others we should
be aware of our own akusala cittas. If one has not studied the
Abhidhamma which explains realities in detail, one may not know what is
akusala. People may take what is unwholesome for wholesome and thus
accumulate unwholesomeness without knowing it. If we know more about
different types of citta we can see for ourselves which types arise
more often, kusala cittas or akusala cittas, and thus we will
understand ourselves better.

We should know the difference between kusala and akusala. The
Atthasālinī (Book I, Part I, chapter I, 38) speaks about the meaning of
the word
``@dfn{kusala}''.
The word
``kusala''
has many meanings; it can mean ``of
good health'',
``faultless'',
``skillful'',
``productive of happy
results''. 

When we perform dāna (generosity), sīla (good moral conduct) and bhāvanā
(mental development), the citta is kusala. All different kinds of
wholesomeness such as the appreciation of other
people's good deeds, helping others, politeness,
paying respect, observing the precepts, studying and teaching Dhamma,
samatha (tranquil meditation) and vipassanā (development of
``insight'',
right understanding of realities), are included in dāna, sīla or
bhāvanā. Kusala is ``productive of
happy results''; each good deed will
bring a pleasant result. The Atthasālinī (Book I, Part I, chapter I,
39) states about akusala: 

@quotation

``A-kusala means
``not
kusala''. Just as the opposite to
friendship is enmity, or the opposite to greed, etc. is
disinterestedness, etc., so
``akusala''
is opposed to
``kusala''@enddots{}

@end quotation

Unwholesome deeds will bring unhappy results. Nobody wishes to
experience an unhappy result, but many people are ignorant about the
cause which brings an unhappy result, about akusala. They do not
realize when the citta is unwholesome, and they do not always know it
when they perform unwholesome deeds.

When we study the Abhidhamma we learn that there are three groups of
akusala cittas. They are:

@itemize

@item
@dfn{Lobha-mūla-cittas}, or cittas rooted in attachment (lobha)

@item
@dfn{Dosa-mūla-cittas}, or cittas rooted in aversion (dosa)

@item
@dfn{Moha-mūla-cittas}, or cittas rooted in ignorance (moha)

@end itemize

Moha (ignorance) arises with every akusala citta. Akusala cittas rooted
in lobha (attachment) actually have two roots: moha and lobha
@footnote{Mūla or hetu are the Pāli terms for root. There are three
akusala hetus: lobha, dosa and moha. Akusala cittas are classified by
way of the accompanying roots.}. They are named
``lobha-mūla-cittas'',
because there is not only moha, which arises with every akusala citta,
but lobha as well. Lobha-mūla-cittas are thus named after the root
which is lobha. Akusala cittas rooted in dosa (aversion) have two roots
as well: moha and dosa. They are named
``dosa-mūla-cittas''
after the root which is dosa. Akusala cittas rooted in moha
(ignorance), have only one root which is moha. Each of these three
classes of akusala cittas includes again different types of akusala
citta and thus we see that there is a great variety of cittas. 

Now I shall deal first with lobha-mūla-citta. Lobha is the paramattha
dhamma (absolute reality) which is cetasika (mental factor arising with
the citta); it is a reality and thus it can be experienced.

@dfn{Lobha} is
``clinging''
or
``attachment''.
The Visuddhimagga (XIV, 162) states:

@quotation
@dots{}lobha has the characteristic of grasping an object, like birdlime
(lit. ``monkey
lime''). Its function is sticking,
like meat put in a hot pan. It is manifested as not giving up, like the
dye of lampblack. Its proximate cause is seeing enjoyment in things
that lead to bondage. Swelling with the current of craving, it should
be regarded as taking (beings) with it to states of loss, as a
swift-flowing river does to the great ocean.

@end quotation

Lobha is sometimes translated as
``greed''
or
``craving'';
it can be translated by different words, since there are many degrees
of lobha. Lobha can be coarse, medium or subtle. Most people can
recognize lobha when it is very obvious, but not when it is of a lesser
degree. For example, we can recognize lobha when we are inclined to eat
too much of a delicious meal, or when we are attached to alcoholic
drinks and cigarettes. We are attached to people and we suffer when we
lose those who are dear to us through death. Then we can see that
attachment brings sorrow. Sometimes attachment is very obvious, but
there are many degrees of lobha and often we may not know that we have
lobha. Cittas arise and fall away very rapidly and we may not realize
it when lobha arises on account of what we experience in daily life
through the six doors, especially if the degree of lobha is not as
intense as greed or lust. Every time there is a pleasant sight, sound,
odour, taste or tangible object, lobha is likely to arise. It arises
many times a day. 

Lobha arises when there are conditions for its arising; it is beyond
control. In many suttas the Buddha speaks about lobha, points out the
dangers of it and the way to overcome it. The pleasant objects which
can be experienced through the five senses are in several suttas called
the ``five strands of
sense-pleasures''. We read in the
Mahā-dukkhakkhandha-sutta (``Greater
Discourse on the Stems of Anguish'',
Middle Length Sayings I, no. 13) that the Buddha, when he was staying
near Sāvatthī, in the Jeta Grove, said to the monks:

@quotation

And what, monks, is the satisfaction in pleasures of the senses? These
five, monks, are the strands of sense-pleasures. What five? Visible
objects cognizable by the eye, agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing,
connected with sensual pleasures, alluring. Sounds, cognizable by the
ear@dots{}Smells, cognizable by the nose@dots{}Tastes cognizable by the
tongue@dots{}Touches, cognizable by the body, agreeable, pleasant, liked,
enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, alluring. These, monks, are
the five strands of sense-pleasures. Whatever pleasure, whatever
happiness arises in consequence of these five strands of
sense-pleasures, this is the satisfaction in sense-pleasures.

@end quotation

The satisfaction in sense-pleasures is not true happiness. Those who do
not know the Buddha's teachings may think that
attachment is wholesome, especially when it arises with pleasant
feeling. They may not know the difference between attachment and loving
kindness (mettā), phenomena which may both arise with pleasant feeling.
However, a citta accompanied by pleasant feeling is not necessarily
kusala citta. When we learn more about akusala cittas and kusala cittas
and when we are mindful of their characteristics, we will notice that
the pleasant feeling which may arise with lobha-mūla-citta (citta
rooted in attachment) is different from the pleasant feeling which may
arise with kusala citta. Feeling (vedanā) is a cetasika which arises
with every citta. When the citta is akusala, the feeling is also
akusala, and when the citta is kusala, the feeling is also kusala. We
may be able to know the difference between the characteristic of the
pleasant feeling arising when we are attached to an agreeable sight or
sound, and the characteristic of the pleasant feeling arising when we
are generous.

The Buddha pointed out that lobha brings sorrow. When we lose people who
are dear to us or when we lose the things we enjoy, we have sorrow. If
we are attached to a comfortable life we may have aversion when we have
to endure hardship or when things do not turn out the way we want them
to be. We read in the Greater Discourse on the Stems of Anguish, which
was quoted above, that the Buddha spoke to the monks about the dangers
in the pleasures of the senses:

@quotation

And what, monks, is the peril in sense-pleasures? In this case, monks, a
young man of family earns his living by some craft @dots{}He is afflicted
by the cold, he is afflicted by the heat, suffering from the touch of
gadflies, mosquitos, wind, sun, creeping things, dying of hunger and
thirst. This, monks, is a peril in pleasures of the senses that is
present, a stem of ill@enddots{}

If, monks, this young man of family rouses himself, exerts himself,
strives thus, but if these possessions do not come to his hand, he
grieves, mourns, laments, beating his breast and wailing, he falls into
disillusionment, and thinks: ``Indeed
my exertion is in vain, indeed my striving is
fruitless.'' This too, monks, is a
peril in the pleasures of the senses that is present@enddots{}

And again, monks, when sense-pleasures are the cause@dots{} kings dispute
with kings, nobles dispute with nobles, brahmans dispute with brahmans,
householders dispute with householders, a mother disputes with her son,
a son disputes with his mother, a father disputes with his son, a son
disputes with his father, a brother disputes with a brother, a brother
disputes with a sister, a sister disputes with a brother, a friend
disputes with a friend. Those who enter into quarrel, contention,
dispute and attack one another with their hands and with stones and
with sticks and with weapons, these suffer dying then and pain like
unto dying. This too, monks, is a peril in the pleasures of the senses
that is present@enddots{}

@end quotation

We then read about many more perils in pleasures of the senses, and
about the bad results they will cause in the future. The Buddha also
explained about the satisfaction and peril in
``material
shapes''. We read:

@quotation

``And what, monks, is the satisfaction
in material shapes? Monks, it is like a girl in a
noble's family or a brahman's family
or a householder's family who at the age of fifteen or
sixteen is not too tall, not too short, not too thin, not too fat, not
too dark, not too fair  @minus{} is she, monks, at the height of her beauty
and loveliness at that time?''

``Yes,
Lord.''

``Monks, whatever happiness and pleasure
arise because of beauty and loveliness, this is satisfaction in
material shapes.

And what, monks, is peril in material shapes? As to this, monks, one
might see that same lady after a time, eighty or ninety or a hundred
years old, aged, crooked as a rafter, bent, leaning on a stick, going
along palsied, miserable, youth gone, teeth broken, hair thinned, skin
wrinkled, stumbling along, the limbs discoloured@enddots{}

@dots{}And again, monks, one might see that same lady, her body thrown aside
in a cemetery, dead for one, two or three days, swollen, discoloured,
decomposing. What would you think, monks? That which was former beauty
and loveliness has vanished, a peril has
appeared?''

``Yes,
Lord.''

``This too, monks, is a peril in
material shapes@enddots{}''

@end quotation

What the Buddha told the monks may sound crude to us, but it is reality.
We find it difficult to accept life as it really is: birth, old age,
sickness and death. We cannot bear to think of our own body or the body
of someone who is dear to us as being a corpse. We accept being born,
but we find it difficult to accept the consequences of birth, which are
old age, sickness and death. We wish to ignore the impermanence of all
conditioned things. When we look into the mirror and when we take care
of our body we are inclined to take it for something which stays and
which belongs to us. However, the body is only rūpa, elements which
fall away as soon as they have arisen. There is no particle of the body
which lasts.

One may cling to the body with wrong view, in Pāli: diṭṭhi. Diṭṭhi is a
cetasika which can arise with lobha-mūla-citta (citta rooted in
attachment). Sometimes there is lobha without wrong view, diṭṭhi, and
sometimes with wrong view. 

There are different kinds of diṭṭhi. The belief in a
``self''
is one kind of diṭṭhi. We may cling to mental phenomena as well as to
physical phenomena with the wrong view of self. Some people believe
that there is a self who exists in this life and who will continue to
exist after this life-span is over. This is the
``eternity-belief''.
Others believe in a self who, existing only in this life, will be
annihilated after this life-span is over. This is the
``annihilation-belief''.
Another form of diṭṭhi is the belief that there is no kamma which
produces vipāka, that deeds do not bring their results. There have
always been people in different countries who think that they can be
purified of their imperfections merely by ablution in water or by
prayers. They believe that the results of ill deeds they committed can
thus be warded off. They do not know that each deed can bring about its
own result. We can only purify ourselves of imperfections if the wisdom
is cultivated which can eradicate them. If one thinks that deeds do not
bring about their appropriate results one may easily be inclined to
believe that the cultivation of wholesomeness is useless. This kind of
belief may lead to ill deeds and to the corruption of society.

There are eight types of lobha-mūla-citta and of these, four types arise
with wrong view, diṭṭhi (in Pāli: diṭṭhigata-sampayutta; sampayutta
means: associated with). Four types of lobha-mūla-citta arise without
wrong view (in Pāli: diṭṭhigata-vippayutta; vippayutta means:
dissociated from). 

As regards the feeling which accompanies the lobha-mūla-citta,
lobha-mūla-cittas can arise either with pleasant feeling or indifferent
feeling, never with unpleasant feeling. Of the four types of
lobha-mūla-citta which are accompanied by diṭṭhi, two types arise with
pleasant feeling, somanassa (in Pāli: somanassa-sahagata; sahagata
means: accompanied by); two types arise with indifferent feeling,
upekkhā (in Pāli: upekkhā-sahagata). For example, when one clings to
the view that there is a self who will continue to exist, the citta can
be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling. Of the
four lobha-mūla-cittas arising without diṭṭhi, two types are
accompanied by pleasant feeling and two types are accompanied by
indifferent feeling. Thus, of the eight types of lobha-mūla-citta, four
types arise with pleasant feeling and four types arise with indifferent
feeling.

In classifying lobha-mūla-cittas there is yet another distinction to be made. Lobha-mūla-cittas can be ``unprompted'', asaṅkhārika, or ``prompted'', sasaṅkhārika. ``Asaṅkhārika'' can be translated a ``unprompted``, ``not induced'', or ``spontaneous''; sasaṅkhārika can be translated as ``prompted'' or ``induced''. The Visuddhimagga(XIV, 91) states about lobha-mūla-citta that it is ``sasaṅkhārika'' ``when it is with consciousness which is sluggish and urged on.'' 

The lobha-mūla-cittas which are sasaṅkhārika can be prompted by the
advice or request of someone else, or they arise induced by oneself.
When the cittas are sasaṅkhārika, they are “sluggish and urged on”;
they are not keen, they are weaker than when they are asaṅkhārika. 

Of the four lobha-mūla-cittas arising with diṭṭhi, two types are
unprompted, asaṅkhārika, and two types are prompted, sasaṅkhārika. As
regards the lobha-mūla-cittas arising without diṭṭhi, two types are
unprompted, asaṅkhārika, and two types are prompted, sasaṅkhārika.
Thus, of the eight types of lobha-mūla-cittas, four types are
unprompted and four types are prompted.

It is useful to learn the Pāli terms and their meaning, because the
English translation does not render the meaning of realities very
clearly.

The eight types of lobha-mūla-citta are:

@itemize

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wrong view, unprompted.
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-sampayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ
@footnote{ekaṃ means “one”. The ṃ at the end of a word is pronounced
as “ng”.}).

@item
 Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wrong view, prompted.
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-sampayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
 Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wrong view, unprompted.
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-vippayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
 Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wrong view, prompted.
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-vippayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
 Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wrong view, unprompted.
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-sampayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ). 

@item
 Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wrong view, prompted.
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-sampayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
 Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wrong view, unprompted.
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-vippayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
 Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wrong view, prompted.
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, diṭṭhigata-vippayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@end itemize

As we have seen, lobha-mūla-cittas can be unprompted or prompted. The
Atthasālinī (Book II, Part IX, chapter III, 225) gives an example of
lobha-mūla-cittas, accompanied by diṭṭhi, which are prompted. A son of
a noble family marries a woman who has wrong views and therefore he
associates with people who have wrong views. Gradually he accepts those
wrong views and then they are pleasing to him.

Lobha-mūla-cittas without diṭṭhi which are sasaṅkhārika arise, for
example, when one, though at first not attached to alcoholic drink,
takes pleasure in it after someone else persuades one to drink.

As we have seen, lobha-mūla-cittas can be accompanied by pleasant
feeling or by indifferent feeling. Lobha-mūla-cittas without diṭṭhi,
accompanied by pleasant feeling, can arise, for example, when we enjoy
ourselves while seeing a beautiful colour or hearing an agreeable
sound. At such moments we can be attached without wrong view about
realities. When we enjoy beautiful clothes, go to the cinema, or laugh
and talk with others about pleasurable things there can be many moments
of enjoyment without the idea of self, but there can also be moments
with diṭṭhi, moments of clinging to a
``self''.

Lobha-mūla-cittas without diṭṭhi, accompanied by indifferent feeling,
may arise, for example, when we like to stand up, or like to take hold
of different objects. Since we generally do not have happy feeling with
these actions, there may be lobha with indifferent feeling at such
moments. Thus we see that lobha often motivates the most common actions
of our daily life.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
When there is lobha is there always pleasant feeling, somanassa, as
well?

@item
Does diṭṭhi, wrong view, arise only with lobha-mūla-citta?

@item
How many types of lobha-mūla-citta are there? Why is it useful to
know this?

@end enumerate    

@node Different Degrees of Lobha
@chapter Different Degrees of Lobha

Lobha, attachment, leads to sorrow. If we really understand this, we
will wish to eradicate lobha. The eradication of lobha, however, cannot
be done immediately. We may be able to suppress lobha for a while, but
it will appear again when there are the right conditions for its
arising. Even though we know that lobha brings sorrow, it is bound to
arise time and again. However, there is a way to eradicate it: it can
be eradicated by the wisdom which sees things as they are.

When we study cittas more in detail it will help us to know ourselves.
We should know not only the gross lobha but also the degrees of lobha
which are more subtle. The following sutta gives an example of lobha
which is more subtle. We read in the Kindred Sayings (I, Sagāthā-vagga
IX, Forest Suttas paragraph 14):

@quotation

A certain monk was once staying among the Kosalese in a certain
forest-tract. Now while there was that monk, after he had returned from
his alms-round and had broken his fast, plunged into the lotus-pool and
sniffed up the perfume of a red lotus. Then the deva who haunted that
forest tract, moved with compassion for that monk, desiring his
welfare, and wishing to agitate him, drew near and addressed him in the
verse:

@end quotation

@example

``That blossom, water-born, thing not given,
You stand sniffing up the scent of it.
This is one class of things that may be stolen.
And you a smell-thief must I call, dear sir.''

(The monk:)

``Nay, nought I bear away, I nothing break.
Standing apart I smell the water's child.
Now for what reason am I smell-thief called?
One who does dig up water-lilies, one
Who feeds on lotuses, in motley tasks
Engaged: why have you no such name for him?''

(The Deva:)

``A man of ruthless, wicked character,
Foul-flecked as is a handmaid's dirty cloth:
With such the words I say have no concern.
But this it is meet that I should say (to you):
To him whose character is void of vice,
Who ever makes quest for what is pure:
What to the wicked but a hair-tip seems,
To him does great as a rain-cloud appear@enddots{}''

@end example

We should also know the more subtle lobha which arises when we enjoy a
fragrant smell or beautiful music. It seems that there are no akusala
cittas when we do not harm others, but also the more subtle lobha is
akusala; it is different from generosity which is kusala. We cannot
force ourselves not to have lobha, but we can come to know the
characteristic of lobha when it appears. 

Not only the suttas, but also the Vinaya (Book of Discipline for the
monks) gives examples of lobha which is more subtle. Each part of the
teachings, the Vinaya, the Suttanta and the Abhidhamma can help us to
know ourselves better. When we read the Vinaya we see that even monks
who lead a life with contentment with little, still have accumulated
conditions for lobha. Every time there was a case where monks deviated
from their purity of life, a rule was laid down in order to help them
to be more watchful. Thus we can understand the usefulness of the
rules, which go into even the smallest details of the
monk's behaviour. The rules help the monk to be
watchful even when performing the most common actions of daily life
such as eating, drinking, robing himself and walking. There are rules
which forbid seemingly innocent actions like playing in the water or
with the water (Expiation, Pācittiya 53), or teasing other monks. Such
actions are not done with kusala cittas, but with akusala cittas.

We read in the Vinaya (III, Suttavibhaṇga, Expiation, Pācittiya 85) that
the monks should not enter a village at the wrong time. The reason is
that they would indulge more easily in worldly talk. We read:

@quotation

Now at that time the group of six monks, having entered a village at the
wrong time, having sat down in a hall, talked a variety of worldly
talk, that is to say: talk of kings, of thieves, of great ministers, of
armies, of fears, of battles, of food, of drink, of clothes, of beds,
of garlands, of scents, of relations, of vehicles, of villages, of
little towns, of towns, of the country, of women, of strong drink, of
streets, of wells, of those departed before, of diversity, of
speculation about the world, about the sea, on becoming and not
becoming thus and thus@enddots{}

@end quotation

This passage is useful for laypeople as well. We cannot help talking
about worldly matters, but we should know that our talking, even if it
seems innocent, is often motivated by lobha-mūla-cittas or by
dosa-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in aversion). In order to know
ourselves we should find out by what kind of citta our talking is
motivated.

Every time a lobha-mūla-citta arises lobha is accumulated. When the
conditions are there, lobha can motivate ill deeds through body, speech
or mind. When we see to what kinds of deeds lobha can lead we will be
more inclined to develop the wisdom which eventually will lead to its
eradication.

Ill deeds are called in Pāli: akusala kamma. Kamma is the cetasika
(mental factor arising with the citta) which is intention or volition,
in Pāli: cetanā. However, the word
``kamma''
is also used in a more general sense for the deeds which are intended
by cetanā. The term kamma-patha (literally
``course of
action'') is used as well in this
sense. There are akusala kamma-pathas and kusala kamma-pathas, ill
deeds and good deeds, accomplished through body, speech and mind. As
regards akusala kamma-patha, there are ten akusala kamma-pathas and
these are conditioned by lobha, dosa and moha. Moha, ignorance,
accompanies every akusala citta, it is the root of all evil. Thus,
whenever there is akusala kamma-patha, there must be moha. Some akusala
kamma-pathas can sometimes be performed with lobha-mūla-citta and
sometimes with dosa-mūla-citta. Therefore, when we see someone else
committing an ill deed we cannot always be sure which kind of citta
motivates that deed. 

The ten akusala kamma-pathas are the following:

@enumerate

@item
Killing

@item
Stealing

@item
Sexual misbehaviour

@item
Lying

@item
Slandering

@item
Rude speech

@item
Frivolous talk

@item
Covetousness

@item
Ill-will

@item
Wrong view (diṭṭhi)

@end enumerate

Killing, stealing and sexual misbehaviour are three akusala kamma-pathas
accomplished through the body. Lying, slandering, rude speech and
frivolous talk are four akusala kamma-pathas accomplished through
speech. Covetousness, ill-will and wrong view are three akusala
kamma-pathas accomplished through the mind. As regards akusala
kamma-patha through the body, killing is done with dosa-mūla-citta.
Stealing can sometimes be performed with lobha-mūla-citta and sometimes
with dosa-mūla-citta. It is done with lobha-mūla-citta if one wishes to
take what belongs to someone else in order to enjoy it oneself. It is
done with dosa-mūla-citta if one wishes someone else to suffer damage.
Sexual misbehaviour is performed with lobha-mūla-citta. 

As far as the akusala kamma-pathas through speech are concerned, lying,
slandering and frivolous talk are performed with lobha-mūla-citta if
one wishes to obtain something for oneself, or if one wishes to endear
oneself to other people. As regards lying, we may think that there is
no harm in a so-called ``white
lie'' or a lie said for fun. However,
all kinds of lies are motivated by akusala cittas. We read in the
``Discourse on an Exhortation to Rāhula
at Ambalaṭṭhikā'' (Middle Length
Sayings II, no. 61, Bhikkhu-vagga) that the Buddha spoke to his son
Rāhula about lying. The Buddha said:

@quotation

Even so, Rāhula, of anyone for whom there is no shame at intentional
lying, of him I say that there is no evil he cannot do. Wherefore, for
you, Rāhula, ``I will not speak a lie,
even for fun''   @minus{}  this is how you
must train yourself, Rāhula.

@end quotation

Lying can also be done with dosa-mūla-citta and this is the case when
one wants to harm someone else.

As regards slandering, we all are inclined to talk about others. When
there is no intention to harm the reputation of others, there is no
akusala kamma-patha. However, when talking about others becomes a
habit, there can easily be an occasion for akusala kamma-patha. This
kind of akusala kamma-patha is performed with lobha-mūla-citta if one
slanders in order to obtain something for oneself or in order to please
others. It is performed with dosa-mūla-citta if one wants to harm
someone else. We will be less inclined to talk about others or to judge
them when we see ourselves and others as phenomena which arise because
of conditions and which do not stay. At the moment we talk about other
people's actions, these phenomena have fallen away
already; what they said or did exists no more. 

Rude speech is performed with dosa-mūla-citta. Frivolous talk is talk
about idle, senseless things. This kind of talk can be performed with
lobha-mūla-citta or with dosa-mūla-citta. Frivolous talk is not always
akusala kamma-patha. It can be done with akusala citta which does not
have the intensity of akusala kamma-patha.

As regards akusala kamma-patha through the mind, ill-will, the intention
to hurt or harm someone else, is motivated by dosa-mūla-citta;
covetousness and wrong view are motivated by lobha-mūla-citta
@footnote{As we have seen (in Ch 4), wrong view accompanies
lobha-mūla-cittas. Whenever there is wrong view there is clinging to
such view.}. There is akusala kamma-patha which is covetousness when
one intends to obtain by dishonest means what belongs to someone else.
As regards diṭṭhi (wrong view), there are many kinds of diṭṭhi;
however, three kinds of diṭṭhi are akusala kamma-patha through the
mind. One of them is ahetuka-diṭṭhi, the belief that there is no cause
for the existence of beings and no cause for their purity or
corruption. Another wrong view which is akusala kamma-patha through the
mind is akiriyā-diṭṭhi, the belief that there are no good and bad deeds
which produce their results. The third wrong view which is akusala
kamma-patha through the mind is natthika-diṭṭhi or annihilation view.
Natthika-diṭṭhi is the belief that there is no result of kamma and that
there is no further life after death.

All degrees of lobha, be it coarse or more subtle, bring sorrow. We are
like slaves so long as we are absorbed in and infatuated with the
objects which present themselves through eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
bodysense and mind. We are not free if our happiness depends on the
situation we are in, and the way others behave towards us. One moment
people may be kind to us, but the next moment they may behave in an
unpleasant way towards us. If we attach too much importance to the
affection of others, we shall be easily disturbed in mind, and thus
become slaves of our moods and emotions.

We can become more independent and free if we realize that both we
ourselves and other people are only nāma and rūpa, phenomena arising
because of conditions and falling away again. When others speak in an
unpleasant way to us there are conditions which cause them to speak in
that way, and there are conditions which cause us to hear such speech.
Other people's behaviour and our reactions to it are
conditioned phenomena which do not stay. At the moment we are thinking
about these phenomena, they have fallen away already. The development
of insight is the way to become less dependent on the vicissitudes of
life. When there is more understanding of the present moment, we will
attach less importance to the way people behave towards us.

Since lobha is rooted so deeply, it can only be eradicated in different
stages. Diṭṭhi has to be eradicated first. The sotāpanna, the person
who has realized the first stage of enlightenment, has eradicated
diṭṭhi. He has developed the wisdom which realizes that all phenomena
are nāma and rūpa, not self. Since he has eradicated diṭṭhi, the
lobha-mūla-cittas with diṭṭhi do not arise anymore. As we have seen,
four types of lobha-mūla-citta arise with diṭṭhi (they are
diṭṭhigata-sampayutta), and four types arise without diṭṭhi (they are
diṭṭhigatha-vippayutta). As for the sotāpanna, the four types of
lobha-mūla-citta without diṭṭhi still arise; he has not yet eradicated
all kinds of attachment. The sotāpanna still has conceit. Conceit can
arise with the four types of lobha-mūla-citta which are without diṭṭhi
(diṭṭhigata-vippayutta). There may be conceit when one compares
oneself with others, when one, for example, thinks that one has more
wisdom than others. When we consider ourselves better, equal or less in
comparison with others we may find ourselves important and then there
is conceit. When we think ourselves less than someone else it is not
necessarily kusala; there may still be a kind of upholding of ourselves
and then there is conceit. Conceit is rooted so deeply that it is
eradicated only when one has become an arahat.

The person who has attained the second stage of enlightenment, the
sakadāgāmī (once-returner), has less lobha than the sotāpanna. The
person who has attained the third stage of enlightenment, the anāgāmī
(never-returner), has no more clinging to the objects which present
themselves through the five senses, but he still has conceit and he
clings to rebirth. The arahat, the perfected one who has attained the
fourth and last stage of enlightenment, has eradicated all forms of
lobha completely.

The arahat is completely free since he has eradicated all defilements.
We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatanavagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, Third Fifty, chapter IV, paragraph 136, Not including), that the Buddha
said to the monks, while he was staying among the Sakkas at Devadaha:

@quotation

Devas and mankind, monks, delight in objects, they are excited by
objects. It is owing to the instability, the coming to an end, the
ceasing of objects, monks, that devas and mankind live woefully. They
delight in sounds, scents, savours, in touch, they delight in
mindstates, and are excited by them. It is owing to the instability,
the coming to an end, the ceasing of mindstates, monks, that devas and
mankind live woefully. 

But the Tathāgata, monks, who is arahat, a Fully-enlightened One,
seeing, as they really are, both the arising and the destruction, the
satisfaction, the misery and the way of escape from objects, @minus{} he
delights not in objects, takes not pleasure in them, is not excited by
them. It is owing to the instability, the coming to an end, the ceasing
of objects that the Tathāgata dwells at ease@enddots{}

@end quotation

The Buddha and all those who are arahats have eradicated clinging to all
objects which are experienced. They have penetrated the true nature of
conditioned realities which arise and fall away, which are impermanent.
The arahat will attain the end of rebirth, the cessation of the arising
of conditioned realities and therefore, he is
``dwelling at
ease''.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
When the objective is not dāna (generosity), sīla (morality) or
bhāvanā (mental development), can  talking be done with kusala citta?

@item
Which cetasika is kamma?

@item
Which are the ten akusala kamma-pathas?

@item
Are all kinds of wrong view, diṭṭhi, akusala kamma-patha?

@item
Why does attachment always lead to sorrow?

@item
Who has eradicated all kinds of lobha?

@end enumerate    

@node The Characteristic of Dosa
@chapter The Characteristic of Dosa

When we are angry with other people we harm ourselves by our anger. The
Buddha pointed out the adverse effects of anger (dosa). We read in the
Gradual Sayings (Book of the Sevens, chapter VI, paragraph 10, Anger) about the
ills a rival wishes his rival to have and which are actually the ills
coming upon an angry woman or man. The sutta states:

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, there is the case of a rival, who wishes thus of a rival:
``Would that he were
ugly!'' And why? A rival, monks, does
not like a handsome rival. Monks, this sort of person, being angry, is
overwhelmed by anger; he is subverted by anger: and however well he be
bathed, anointed, trimmed as to the hair and beard, clad in spotless
linen; yet for all that he is ugly, being overwhelmed by anger. Monks,
this is the first condition, fostered by rivals, causing rivals, which
comes upon an angry woman or man.

Again, there is the case of a rival, who wishes thus of a rival:
``Would that he might sleep
badly!'' And why? A rival, monks,
does not like a rival to sleep well. Monks, this sort of person, being
angry, is overwhelmed by anger; he is subverted by anger: and in spite
of his lying on a couch, spread with a fleecy cover, spread with a
white blanket, spread with a woollen coverlet, flower embroidered,
covered with rugs of antelope skins, with awnings above; or on a sofa,
with crimson cushions at either end; yet for all that he lies in
discomfort, being overwhelmed by anger. Monks, this is the second
condition@enddots{}

@end quotation

We then read about other misfortunes a rival wishes for his rival, which
come upon an angry woman or man. We read that a rival wishes his rival
to be without prosperity, wealth and fame. Further we read that a rival
wishes a rival to be without friends and this happens to someone who is
an angry person. The text states:

@quotation

Monks, this sort of person, being angry@dots{}whatever friends, intimates,
relations and kinsmen he may have, they will avoid him and keep far
away from him, because he is overwhelmed by anger@enddots{}

@end quotation

A rival wishes his rival to have an unhappy rebirth and this can happen
to an angry person. We read:

@quotation
@dots{}Monks, this sort of person, being angry@dots{}he misconducts himself in
deed, in word and thought; so living, so speaking and so thinking, on
breaking up of the body after death he is reborn in the untoward way,
the ill way, the abyss, hell@enddots{}

@end quotation

We would like to live in a world of harmony and unity among nations and
we are disturbed when people commit acts of violence. We should
consider what the real cause is of war and discord between people: it
is the defilements which people have accumulated. When we have aversion
we think that other people or unpleasant situations are the cause of
our aversion. However, our accumulation of dosa is the real cause for
aversion to arise time and again. If we want to have less dosa we
should know the characteristic of dosa and we should be aware of it
when it arises.

Dosa has many degrees; it can be a slight aversion or it can be more
coarse, such as anger. We can recognize dosa when it is coarse, but do
we realize that we have dosa when it is more subtle? Through the study
of the Abhidhamma we learn more about the characteristic of dosa. Dosa
is an akusala cetasika (mental factor) arising with akusala citta; it
is a cetasika that is an unwholesome root, akusala hetu. A citta rooted
in dosa is called in Pāli: dosa-mūla-citta. The characteristic of dosa
is different from the characteristic of lobha. When there is lobha, the
citta likes the object which it experiences at that moment, whereas
when there is dosa, the citta has aversion towards the object it
experiences. We can recognize dosa when we are angry with someone and
when we speak disagreeable words to him. But when we are afraid of
something there is dosa as well, because one has aversion towards the
object one is afraid of. There are so many things in life we are afraid
of; we are afraid of the future, of diseases, of accidents, of death.
We look for many means in order to be cured of anguish, but the only
way is the development of the wisdom which eradicates the latent
tendency of dosa.

Dosa is conditioned by lobha: we do not want to lose what is dear to us
and when this actually happens we are sad. Sadness is dosa, it is
akusala. If we do not know things as they are, we believe that people
and things last. However, people and things are only phenomena which
arise and then fall away immediately. The next moment they have changed
already. If we can see things as they are we will be less overwhelmed
by sadness. It makes no sense to be sad about what has happened
already.

In the Psalms of the Sisters (Therīgāthā, 33) we read that the
King's wife Ubbirī mourned the loss of her daughter
Jīvā. Every day she went to the cemetery. She met the Buddha who told
her that in that cemetery about eighty-four thousand of her daughters
(in past lives) had been burnt. The Buddha said to her:

@example

O, Ubbirī, who wails in the wood
Crying, ``O Jīvā! O my daughter dear!''
Come to yourself! See, in this burying-ground
Are burnt full many a thousand daughters dear, 
And all of them were named like her.
Now which of all those Jīvās do you mourn?

@end example

After Ubbirī pondered over the Dhamma thus taught by the Buddha she
developed insight and saw things as they really are; she even attained
arahatship.

There are other akusala cetasikas which can arise with cittas rooted in
dosa. Regret or worry, in Pāli: @dfn{kukkucca}, is an akusala cetasika which
arises with dosa-mūla-citta at the moment we regret something bad we
did or something good we omitted to do. When there is regret we are
thinking of the past instead of knowing the present moment. When we
have done something wrong it is of no use to have aversion.

Envy (@dfn{issā}) is another cetasika which can arise with dosa-mūla-citta.
There is envy when we do not like someone else to enjoy pleasant
things. At that moment the citta does not like the object it
experiences. We should find out how often envy arises, even when it is
more subtle. This is a way to know whether we really care for someone
else or whether we only think of ourselves when we associate with
others. 

Stinginess (@dfn{macchariya}) is another akusala cetasika which may arise with
dosa-mūla-citta. When we are stingy there is dosa as well. At that
moment we do not like someone else to share in our good fortune.

Dosa always arises with an unpleasant feeling (domanassa vedanā). Most
people do not like to have dosa because they do not like to have an
unpleasant feeling. As we develop more understanding of realities we
want to eradicate dosa not so much because we dislike unpleasant
feeling, but rather because we realize the adverse effects of akusala. 

Dosa can arise on account of the objects experienced through the five
sense-doors and the mind-door. It can arise when we see ugly sights,
hear harsh sounds, smell unpleasant odours, taste unappetizing food,
experience unpleasant tangible objects through the bodysense and think
of disagreeable things. Whenever there is a feeling of uneasiness, no
matter how slight, it is evident that there is dosa. Dosa may often
arise when there is the experience of unpleasant objects through the
senses, for example, when the temperature is too hot or too cold.
Whenever there is a slightly unpleasant bodily sensation dosa may
arise, be it only of a lesser degree.

Dosa arises when there are conditions for it. It arises so long as there
is still attachment to the objects which can be experienced through the
five senses. Everybody would like to experience only pleasant things
and when one does not have them any more, dosa may arise.

Another condition for dosa is ignorance of the Dhamma. If we are
ignorant of kamma and vipāka, cause and result, dosa may arise very
easily on account of an unpleasant experience through one of the senses
and thus dosa is accumulated time and again. An unpleasant experience
through one of the senses is akusala vipāka caused by an unwholesome
deed we performed. When, for example, someone speaks unpleasant words
to us, we may be angry with that person. Those who have studied the
Dhamma know that hearing an unpleasant sound is akusala vipāka which is
not caused by someone else but by an unwholesome deed performed by
oneself. A moment of vipāka falls away immediately, it does not stay.
Are we not inclined to keep on thinking about an unpleasant experience?
If there is more awareness of the present moment one will be less
inclined to think with aversion about one's akusala
vipāka. 

When we study the Abhidhamma we learn that there are two types of
dosa-mūla-citta: one of these is unprompted (@dfn{asaṅkhārika}) and one is
prompted (@dfn{sasaṅkhārika}). Dosa is prompted (sasaṅkhārika) when, for
example, one becomes angry after having been reminded of the
disagreeable actions of someone else. Dosa-mūla-cittas are always
accompanied by domanassa (unpleasant feeling). There are two types of
dosa-mūla-citta which are the following:

@enumerate

@item
Accompanied by unpleasant feeling, arising with anger, unprompted
(Domanassa-sahagataṃ, paṭigha-sampayuttaṃ @footnote{Paṭigha is another
word for dosa.}, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
Accompanied by unpleasant feeling, arising with anger, prompted
(Domanassa-sahagataṃ, paṭigha-sampayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@end enumerate

As we have seen, there are many degrees of dosa; it may be coarse or
more subtle. When dosa is coarse, it causes akusala kamma-patha
(unwholesome deeds) through body, speech or mind. Two kinds of akusala
kamma-patha through the body can be performed with dosa-mūla-citta:
killing and stealing. If we want less violence in the world we should
try not to kill. When we kill we accumulate a great deal of dosa. The
monk's life should be a life of non-violence; he
should not hurt any living being in the world. However, not everyone is
able to live like the monks. Defilements are anattā (not self); they
arise because of conditions. The purpose of the
Buddha's teaching is not to lay down rules which
forbid people to commit ill deeds, but to help people to develop the
wisdom which eradicates defilements. There are precepts for laypeople,
but these are rules of training rather than commandments. 

As regards stealing, this can either be performed with lobha-mūla-citta
or with dosa-mūla-citta. It is done with dosa-mūla-citta when there is
the intention to harm someone else. Doing damage to someone
else's possessions is included in this kamma-patha.

Four kinds of akusala kamma-patha through speech can be performed with
dosa-mūla-citta: lying, slandering, rude speech and frivolous talk.
Lying, slandering and frivolous talk can either be performed with
lobha-mūla-citta or with dosa-mūla-citta. Slandering, for example, is
performed with dosa-mūla-citta when there is the intention to cause
damage to someone else, such as doing harm to his good name and causing
him to be looked down upon by others. Most people think that the use of
weapons is to be avoided, but they forget that the tongue can be a
weapon as well, a weapon which can badly wound. Evil speech does a
great deal of harm in the world; it causes discord between people. When
we speak evil we harm ourselves, because at such moments akusala kamma
is accumulated and it is capable of producing akusala vipāka. 

We read in the Sutta Nipāta (Chapter III, the Great Chapter, 10,
Kokāliya, ``Khuddaka
Nikāya'') that while the Buddha was
staying at Sāvatthī, the bhikkhu Kokāliya visited him. Kokāliya spoke
evil of Sāriputta and Moggallāna, saying that they had evil desires.
Three times the Buddha told him not to speak in that way. After
Kokāliya had departed boils developed all over his body which became
bigger and bigger and discharged pus and blood. He died and was reborn
in the Paduma hell. Later on the Buddha told the monks about
Kokāliya's evil speech and his rebirth in hell. We
read (vs. 657, 658) that the Buddha said:

@quotation

``Surely in the mouth of a man, when
born, an axe is born, with which the fool cuts himself, saying a
badly-spoken (utterance).

He who praises him who is to be blamed, or blames him who is to be
praised, accumulates evil by his mouth. Because of that evil he does
not find happiness@enddots{}

@end quotation

As regards akusala kamma-patha through the mind performed with
dosa-mūla-citta, this is the intention to hurt or harm someone else. 

People often speak about violence and the ways to cure it. Who of us can
say that he is free from dosa and that he will never kill? We do not
know how much dosa we have accumulated in the course of many lives.
When the conditions are present we might commit an act of violence we
did not realize we were capable of. When we understand how ugly dosa is
and to what deeds it can lead we want to eradicate it.

In performing kind deeds we cannot eradicate the latent tendency of
dosa, but at least at those moments we do not accumulate more dosa. The
Buddha exhorted people to cultivate loving kindness (mettā). We read in
the Karaniya Mettā-sutta (Sutta Nipāta, vs. 143-152) @footnote{I am
using the translation by the venerable Bhikkhu Ñanamoli, Buddhist
Publication Society, Wheel 7, Kandy, Sri Lanka.} that the Buddha spoke
the following words.

@example

What should be done by one skillful in good
So as to gain the State of Peace is this:

Let him be able, and upright, and straight.
Easy to speak to, gentle, and not proud,
Contented too, supported easily,
With few tasks, and living very lightly,
His faculties serene, prudent and modest,
Unswayed by the emotions of the clans;
And let him never do the slightest thing
That other wise men might hold blamable.

(And let him think) ``In safety and in bliss
May creatures all be of a blissful heart.
Whatever breathing beings there may be,
No matter whether they are frail or firm,
With none excepted, be they long or big
Or middle-sized, or be they short or small
Or thick, as well as those seen or unseen,
Or whether they are dwelling far or near,
Existing or yet seeking to exist,
May creatures all be of a blissful heart.
Let no one work another one's undoing
Or even slight him at all anywhere;
And never let them wish each other ill
Through provocation or resentful
thought.''

And just as might a mother with her life
Protect the son that was her only child,
So let him then for every living thing
Maintain unbounded consciousness in being,
And let him too with love for all the world
Maintain unbounded consciousness in being
Above, below, and all around in between,
Untroubled, with no enemy or foe.
And while he stands, or walks or while he sits
Or while he lies down, free from drowsiness,
Let him resolve upon mindfulness:
This is Divine Abiding here, they say.

But when he has no trafficking with views @footnote{Wrong view.},
Is virtuous, and has perfected seeing,
And purges greed for sensual desires,
He surely comes no more to any womb.

@end example

The Buddha taught us not to be angry with those who are unpleasant to
us. We read in the Vinaya (Mahāvagga X, 349) that the Buddha said to
the monks:

@example

They who (in thought) belabour this: That man
has me abused, has hurt, has worsted me, 
has me despoiled: in these wrath is not allayed.

They who do not belabour this: That man
has me abused, has hurt, has worsted me,
has me despoiled: in them wrath is allayed.

Nay, not by wrath are wrathful moods allayed 
    here (and) at any time,
but by not-wrath are they allayed: 
    this is an (ageless) endless rule.

@end example

At times it seems impossible for us to have mettā instead of dosa. For
example, when people treat us badly we may feel very unhappy and we
keep on pondering over our misery. So long as dosa has not been
eradicated there are still conditions for its arising. By being mindful
of all realities which appear the wisdom is developed which can
eventually eradicate dosa. 

Dosa can only be eradicated stage by stage. The sotāpanna (the
streamwinner, who has attained the first stage of enlightenment) has
not yet eradicated dosa and also at the subsequent stage of
enlightenment, the stage of the sakadāgāmī (once-returner), dosa is not
yet eradicated completely. The anāgāmī (the non-returner, who has
attained the third stage of enlightenment) has eradicated dosa
completely; he has no more latent tendency of dosa. 

We have not eradicated dosa, but when dosa appears, we can be mindful of
its characteristic in order to know it as a type of nāma, arising
because of conditions. When there is no mindfulness of dosa when it
appears, dosa seems to last and we take it for self. Through
mindfulness of nāmas and rūpas which present themselves one at a time,
we will learn that there are different characteristics of nāma and
rūpa, none of which lasts and we will also know the characteristic of
dosa as only a type of nāma, not self. 

When a clearer understanding of realities is developed we will be less
inclined to ponder for a long time over an unpleasant experience, since
it is only a type of nāma which does not last. We will attend more to
the present moment instead of thinking about the past or the future. We
will also be less inclined to tell other people about unpleasant things
which have happened to us, since that may be a condition for both
ourselves and others to accumulate more dosa. When someone is angry
with us we will have more understanding of his situation; he may be
tired or not feeling well. Those who treat us badly deserve compassion
because they actually make themselves unhappy.

Right understanding of realities will help us most of all to have more
loving kindness and compassion towards others instead of dosa. 

@heading Questions 

@enumerate

@item
Why is lobha a condition for dosa?

@item
Lying, slandering and frivolous talk are akusala kamma-patha through
speech which can be  performed either with lobha-mūla-citta or with
dosa-mūla-citta. When are they performed with dosa-mūla-citta?

@item
Is there akusala kamma-patha through the mind performed with dosa-mūla-citta?

@end enumerate  

@node Ignorance
@chapter Ignorance

We may know when we have akusala cittas rooted in lobha (attachment) or
akusala cittas rooted in dosa (aversion), but do we know when we have
akusala cittas rooted in @dfn{moha} (ignorance)? What is the characteristic
of moha? We may think someone ignorant who does not have much
education, who does not speak foreign languages, who does not know
anything about history or politics. We call someone ignorant who does
not know what is happening in the world. Is that the kind of ignorance
which should be eradicated? If that were true it would mean that there
is more wholesomeness in one's life if one speaks
foreign languages or if one knows about history and politics. We can
find out that this is not true. 

In order to understand the characteristic of moha we should know what we
are ignorant of when there is moha. There is the world of concepts
which in our daily, ordinary language are denoted by conventional terms
and there is the world of paramattha dhammas or ultimate realities.
When we think of the concept which in conventional language is denoted
by
``world'',
we may think of people, animals and things and we call them by their
appropriate names. But do we know the phenomena in ourselves and around
ourselves as they really are: only nāma and rūpa which do not last?

The world of paramattha dhammas is real. Nāma and rūpa are paramattha
dhammas. The nāmas and rūpas which appear in our daily life can be
directly experienced through the five sense-doors and the mind-door, no
matter how we name them. This is the world which is real. When we see,
there is the world of visible object. When we hear, there is the world
of sound. When we experience an object through touch there is the world
of tangible object. Visible object and seeing are real. Their
characteristics cannot be altered and they can be directly experienced;
it does not matter whether we call them
``visible
object'' and
``seeing'',
or whether we give them another name. But when we cling to concepts
which are denoted by conventional terms such as
``tree''
or
``chair'',
we do not experience any characteristic of reality. What is real when
we look at a tree? What can be directly experienced? Visible object is
a paramattha dhamma, a reality; it is a kind of rūpa which can be
directly experienced through the eyes. Through touch hardness can be
experienced; this is a kind of rūpa which can be directly experienced
through the bodysense, it is real.
``Tree''
is a concept or idea of which we can think, but it is not a paramattha
dhamma, not a reality which has its own unchangeable characteristic.
Visible object and hardness are paramattha dhammas, they have their own
characteristics which can be directly experienced, no matter how one
names them.

The world experienced through the six doors is real, but it does not
last; it is impermanent. When we see, there is the world of the
visible, but it falls away immediately. When we hear, there is the
world of sound, but it does not last either. It is the same with the
world of smell, the world of flavour, the world of tangible object and
the world of objects experienced through the mind-door. However, we
usually know only the world of concepts, because ignorance and wrong
view have been accumulated for so long. Ignorance of paramattha dhammas
is the kind of ignorance which should be eradicated; it brings sorrow.
Ignorance conditions the wrong view of self and all other defilements.
So long as there is ignorance we are deluding ourselves, we do not know
what our life really is: conditioned phenomena which arise and fall
away. 

The world in the sense of paramattha dhammas is in the teachings called
``the world in the ariyan
sense''. The ariyan has developed the
wisdom which sees things as they are; he truly knows
``the
world''. We read in the Kindred
Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Second Fifty,
chapter IV, paragraph 84, Transitory) that Ānanda said to the Buddha:

@quotation

`` `The world! The
world!' is the saying lord. Pray, how far, lord, does
this saying go?''

``What is transitory by nature, Ānanda,
is called `the world' in the ariyan
sense. And what, Ānanda, is transitory by nature? The eye, Ānanda, is
transitory by nature@dots{}objects@dots{}tongue@dots{}mind @footnote{The Pāli
text is abridged, but also included are: the ear@enddots{}the nose@enddots{}the
bodysense, all realities  appearing through the six doors.} is
transitory by nature, mind-states, mind-consciousness, mind-contact,
whatsoever pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling or indifferent feeling
which arises owing to mind-contact, that also is transitory by nature.
What is thus transitory, Ānanda, is called `the
world' in the ariyan
sense.''

@end quotation

Someone may think that he can truly know himself without knowing the
world as it appears through the six doors. He may think that he knows
his anger and attachment, but, in fact, he has not experienced them as
they are: only different types of nāma and not self. So long as he has
wrong view of realities he does not really know himself and he cannot
eradicate defilements. He clings to an idea, to the concept of self; he
has not directly experienced any characteristic of reality. It is
difficult to know when there are lobha, dosa and moha, and it is
difficult to be aware also of the more subtle degrees of akusala. When
we start to develop
``insight'',
right understanding of realities, we realize how little we know
ourselves.

When there is moha we live in darkness. It was the
Buddha's great compassion which moved him to teach
people Dhamma. Dhamma is the light which can dispel darkness. If we do
not know Dhamma we are ignorant of the world, of ourselves; we are
ignorant of good and ill deeds and their results; we are ignorant of
the way to eradicate defilements. 

The study of the Abhidhamma will help us to have more understanding of
the characteristic of moha. The Atthasālinī (Book II, Part IX, chapter
I, 249) states about moha:

@quotation

``Delusion''
(moha) has the characteristic of blindness or opposition to knowledge;
the essence of non-penetration, or the function of covering the
intrinsic nature of the object; the manifestation of being opposed to
right conduct or causing blindness; the proximate cause of unwise
attention; and it should be regarded as the root of all akusala@enddots{}

@end quotation

There are many degrees of moha. When we study Dhamma we become less
ignorant of realities; we will have more understanding of paramattha
dhammas, of kamma and vipāka. However, this does not mean that we can
already eradicate moha. Moha cannot be eradicated merely by thinking of
the truth; it can only be eradicated by developing the wisdom which
knows ``the world in the ariyan
sense'': eyesense, visible object,
seeing-consciousness, earsense, sound, hearing-consciousness, and all
realities appearing through the six doors.

When we study the Abhidhamma we learn that moha arises with all akusala
cittas. Lobha-mūla-cittas have moha and lobha as roots;
dosa-mūla-cittas have moha and dosa as roots. There are two types of
akusala citta which have moha as their only root, these are
moha-mūla-cittas. One type of moha-mūla-citta is moha-mūla-citta
accompanied by doubt (in Pāli: @dfn{vicikicchā}), and one type is
moha-mūla-citta accompanied by restlessness (in Pāli: uddhacca). The
feeling which accompanies moha-mūla-cittas is always indifferent
feeling (upekkhā). When the citta is moha-mūla-citta there is no like
or dislike; one does not have pleasant or unpleasant feeling. Both
types of moha-mūla-citta are unprompted (asaṅkhārika). 

The characteristic of moha should not be confused with the
characteristic of diṭṭhi (wrong view), which only arises with
lobha-mūla-cittas. When diṭṭhi arises one takes, for example, what is
impermanent for permanent, or one believes that there is a self. Moha
is not wrong view, it is ignorance of realities. Moha conditions
diṭṭhi, but the characteristic of moha is different from the
characteristic of diṭṭhi.

The two types of moha-mūla-citta are:

@enumerate

@item
Arising with indifferent feeling, accompanied by doubt 
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, vicikicchā-sampayuttaṃ).

@item
Arising with indifferent feeling, accompanied by restlessness
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, uddhacca-sampayuttaṃ).

@end enumerate

When we have the type of moha-mūla-citta which is accompanied by doubt,
we doubt about the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha @footnote{The
Sangha is the order of monks, but it also means the “ariyan Sangha”,
the  noble persons who have attained enlightenment.}. We may doubt
whether the Buddha really discovered the truth, whether he taught the
Path leading to the end of defilements, whether there are other people
who can become enlightened as well. We may doubt about past and future
lives, about kamma and vipāka. There are many degrees of doubt. When we
start to develop insight we may have doubt about the reality of the
present moment; we may doubt whether it is nāma or rūpa. For example,
when there is hearing, there is sound as well, but there can be
awareness of only one reality at a time, since only one object at a
time can be experienced by citta. We may doubt whether the reality
which appears at the present moment is the nāma which hears or the rūpa
which is sound. Nāma and rūpa arise and fall away so rapidly and when a
precise understanding of their different characteristics has not been
developed one does not know which reality appears at the present
moment. There will be doubt about the world of paramattha dhammas until
paññā (wisdom) clearly knows the characteristics of nāma and rūpa as
they appear through the six doors. 

The Atthasālinī (Book II, Part IX, chapter III, 259) states about doubt:

@quotation

Here doubt means exclusion from the cure (of knowledge). Or, one
investigating the intrinsic nature by means of it suffers pain and
fatigue (kicchati)@minus{}thus it is doubt. It has shifting about as
characteristic, mental wavering as function, indecision or uncertainty
in grasp as manifestation, unsystematic thought (unwise attention) as
proximate cause, and it should be regarded as a danger to attainment.

@end quotation

Doubt is different from wrong view (diṭṭhi). When there is diṭṭhi one
clings, for example, to the view that phenomena are permanent or that
they are self. When vicikicchā, doubt, arises, one wonders whether the
mind is different from the body or not, whether phenomena are permanent
or impermanent. There is no other way to eradicate doubt but the
development of paññā which sees realities as they are. People who have
doubts about the Buddha and his teachings may think that doubt can be
cured by studying historical facts. They want to find out more details
about the time the Buddha lived and about the places where he moved
about; they want to know the exact time the texts were written down.
They cannot be cured of their doubt by studying historical events; this
does not lead to the goal of the Buddha's teachings
which is the eradication of defilements.

People in the Buddha's time too were speculating about
things which do not lead to the goal of the teachings. They were
wondering whether the world is finite or infinite, whether the world is
eternal or not eternal, whether the Tathāgata (the Buddha) exists after
his final passing away or not. We read in the Lesser Discourse to
Māluṅkyā (Middle Length Sayings II, no. 63) that Māluṅkyāputta was
displeased that the Buddha did not give explanations with regard to
speculative views. He wanted to question the Buddha on these views and
if the Buddha would not give him an explanation with regard to these
views he wanted to leave the order. He spoke to the Buddha about this
matter and the Buddha asked him whether he had ever said to
Māluṅkyāputta:

@quotation

``Come you, Māluṅkyāputta, fare the
Brahma-faring @footnote{The Brahma-faring is the “holy life” of the
monk who develops the eightfold Path in order to become an arahat. In a
wider sense: all those who develop the eightfold Path leading to
enlightenment, laypeople included, are “faring the Brahma-faring”, in
Pāli: brahma-cariya.} under me and I will explain to you either that
the world is eternal or that the world is not eternal@dots{}or that the
Tathāgata is@dots{}is not after dying@dots{}both is and is not after dying@enddots{}
neither is nor is not after dying?''

@end quotation

We read that Māluṅkyāputta answered:
``No, revered
sir.'' The Buddha also asked him
whether he (Māluṅkyāputta) had said that he would
``fare the
Brahma-faring'' under the Lord if the
Lord would give him an explanation with regard to these views and again
Māluṅkyāputta answered: ``No, revered
sir.'' The Buddha then compared his
situation with the case of a man who is pierced by a poisoned arrow and
who will not draw out the arrow until he knows whether the man who
pierced him is a noble, a brahman, a merchant or a worker; until he
knows the name of the man and his clan; until he knows his outward
appearance; until he knows about the bow, the bowstring, the material
of the shaft, the kind of arrow. However, he will pass away before he
knows all this. It is the same with the person who only wants to
``fare the
Brahma-faring'' under the Lord if
explanations with regard to speculative views are given to him. We read
that the Buddha said:

@quotation

The living of the Brahma-faring, Māluṅkyāputta, could not be said to
depend on the view that the world is eternal. Nor could the living of
the Brahma-faring, Māluṅkyāputta, be said to depend on the view that
the world is not eternal. Whether there is the view that the world is
eternal or whether there is the view that the world is not eternal,
there is birth, there is ageing, there is dying, there are grief,
sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair, the destruction of which I
lay down here and now@enddots{}

Wherefore, Māluṅkyāputta, understand as not explained what has not been
explained by me, and understand as explained what has been explained by
me. And what, Māluṅkyāputta, has not been explained by me? That the
world is eternal@dots{}that the world is not eternal has not been
explained by me@dots{}And why, Māluṅkyāputta, has this not been explained
by me? It is because it is not connected with the goal, it is not
fundamental to the Brahma-faring, and does not conduce to turning away
from, nor to dispassion, stopping, calming, superknowledge, awakening,
nor to nibbāna. Therefore it has not been explained by me,
Māluṅkyāputta. And what has been explained by me, Māluṅkyāputta?
``This is
dukkha'' has been explained by me,
Māluṅkyāputta. ``This is the arising of
dukkha'' has been explained by me.
``This is the stopping of
dukkha'' has been explained by me.
``This is the course leading to the
stopping of dukkha'' has been
explained by me. And why, Māluṅkyāputta, has this been explained by me?
It is because it is connected with the goal, it is fundamental to the
Brahma-faring, and conduces to turning away from, to dispassion,
stopping, calming, super-knowledge, awakening and nibbāna@enddots{}

@end quotation

Doubt cannot be cured by speculating about matters which do not lead to
the goal; it can only be cured by being aware of the nāma and rūpa
which present themselves now. Even when there is doubt, this can be
realized as only a type of nāma which arises because of conditions and
which is not self. Thus the reality of the present moment will be known
more clearly. 

The second type of moha-mūla-citta is accompanied by indifferent
feeling, arising with restlessness (upekkhā-sahagataṃ,
uddhacca-sampayuttaṃ). @dfn{Uddhacca} is translated as restlessness or
excitement. Uddhacca arises with all akusala cittas. When there is
uddhacca there is no sati (mindfulness) with the citta. Sati arises
with each wholesome citta; it is mindful, non-forgetful, of what is
wholesome. There is sati not only in vipassanā, the development of
right understanding of realities, but also with each kind of kusala.
There is sati when one performs dāna (generosity), observes sīla (good
moral conduct) or applies oneself to bhāvanā, mental development, which
comprises studying or teaching the Dhamma, the development of samatha,
tranquil meditation, and vipassanā. Sati in vipassanā is aware of a
characteristic of nāma or rūpa. 

When there is uddhacca, the citta cannot be wholesome; one cannot at
that moment apply oneself to dāna, sīla or bhāvanā. Uddhacca distracts
the citta from kusala. Uddhacca is restlessness with regard to kusala.
Thus, uddhacca is different from what we in conventional language mean
by restlessness.

Uddhacca arises also with the moha-mūla-citta which is accompanied by
doubt, since it arises with each akusala citta. The second type of
moha-mūla-citta, however, is called uddhacca-sampayutta; it is
different from the first type of moha-mūla-citta which is called
vicikicchā-sampayutta. 

The second type of moha-mūla-citta, the moha-mūla-citta which is
uddhacca-sampayutta, accompanied by restlessness, arises countless
times a day, but it is difficult to know its characteristic. If one has
not developed vipassanā one does not know this type of citta. When we
are forgetful of realities and
``day-dreaming'',
there is not necessarily this type of citta. When we are
``day-dreaming''there
is not only the second type of moha-mūla-citta (uddhacca-sampayutta),
but also lobha-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in attachment) and
dosa-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in aversion) may arise. 

Moha-mūla-citta can arise on account of what we experience through the
five sense-doors and through the mind-door. When, for example, we have
heard sound, moha-mūla-citta may arise. When the second type of
moha-mūla-citta which is uddhacca-sampayutta arises, there is ignorance
and forgetfulness with regard to the object which is experienced at
that moment. We may not see the danger of this type of citta since it
is accompanied by indifferent feeling and thus less obvious. However,
all kinds of akusala are dangerous.

Moha is dangerous, it is the root of all akusala. When we are ignorant
of realities, we accumulate a great deal of akusala. Moha conditions
lobha; when we do not know realities as they are we become absorbed in
the things we experience through the senses. Moha also conditions dosa;
when we are ignorant of realities we have aversion towards unpleasant
experiences. Moha accompanies each akusala citta and it conditions all
ten kinds of akusala kamma patha (killing, stealing, lying etc.) which
are accomplished through body, speech and mind @footnote{See chapter
5.}. Only when there is mindfulness of the realities which appear
through the six doors, the wisdom is developed which can eradicate
moha.

The sotāpanna (the
``streamwinner'',
who has attained the first stage of enlightenment) has eradicated the
moha-mūla-citta which is accompanied by doubt, vicikicchā; he has no
more doubts about paramattha dhammas, he knows the
``world in the ariyan
sense''. He has no doubts about the
Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. He has no doubts about the Path
leading to the end of defilements. The sotāpanna, the sakadāgāmī (the
``once-returner, who has attained the
second stage of enlightenment) and the anāgāmī (the
``non-returner'',
who has attained the third stage of enlightenment) still have the type
of moha-mūla-citta accompanied by uddhacca, restlessness. Only the
arahat has eradicated all akusala.

Ignorance is not seeing the true characteristics of realities, not
knowing the four noble Truths. Out of ignorance one does not see the
first noble Truth, the Truth of dukkha: one does not realize the nāma
and rūpa which appear as impermanent and therefore one does not see
them as dukkha, unsatisfactory. One does not know the second noble
Truth: the origin of dukkha which is craving. Because of clinging to
nāma and rūpa there is no end to the cycle of birth and death and thus
there is no end to dukkha. One does not know the noble truth of the
cessation of dukkha, which is nibbāna. One does not know the noble
Truth of the way leading to the cessation of dukkha, which is the
eightfold Path. The eightfold Path is developed through vipassanā. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings
about Jambukhādaka, paragraph 9) that Jambukhādaka asked Sāriputta:

@quotation

`` `Ignorance,
ignorance!' is the saying, friend Sāriputta. Pray,
what is ignorance?''

``Not understanding about dukkha,
friend, not understanding about the arising of dukkha, the ceasing of
dukkha, the way leading to the ceasing of dukkha  @minus{} this, friend, is
called
`ignorance'.''

``But is there any way, friend, any
approach to the abandoning of this
ignorance?''

``There is indeed a way, friend, to such
abandoning.''

``And what, friend, is that way, that
approach to the abandoning of this
ignorance?''

``It is this ariyan eightfold Path,
friend@enddots{}''

@end quotation

The ariyan eightfold Path leads to the eradication of moha.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
What is ignorance? Why should it be eradicated?

@item
How can it be eradicated?

@item
When there is doubt (vicikicchā) about realities, is there moha as
well?

@item
On account of experiences through which doors can moha arise?

@end enumerate


@node Ahetuka Cittas (Rootless Cittas)
@chapter Ahetuka Cittas (Rootless Cittas)

If we want to know ourselves we should not merely know the moments of
akusala cittas or kusala cittas but other moments as well. When we see
something ugly, we dislike what we see. At the moment of dislike there
is akusala citta rooted in dosa (aversion). Before there is dislike,
however, there must be moments of merely seeing visible object. At
these moments there are not yet akusala cittas, but cittas which are
without
``root''
(in Pāli: @dfn{hetu}). 

There are six cetasikas which are hetu or root. Three of these hetus are
akusala; they are: lobha (attachment), dosa (aversion) and moha
(ignorance). Three hetus are sobhana (beautiful); they are: alobha
@footnote{In Pāli “a” is a negative.} (greedlessness or generosity),
adosa (non-hate or loving kindness) and amoha (paññā or wisdom). The
citta or cetasika which is accompanied by a hetu is sahetuka
(``sa''
means
``with'').
For example, dosa-mūla-citta is sahetuka; moha and dosa are the hetus
which arise with dosa-mūla-citta.

Cittas without hetu are @dfn{ahetuka} cittas. There are many ahetuka cittas
arising in a day. Whenever we see, hear, smell, taste or experience
tangible object through the bodysense, there are ahetuka cittas before
cittas with akusala hetus or with sobhana hetus arise. We are inclined
to pay attention only to the moments of like and dislike, but we should
know other moments as well; we should know ahetuka cittas. 

There are altogether eighteen types of ahetuka citta. As I will explain,
fifteen types of ahetuka cittas are vipākacittas and three types are
kiriyacittas (cittas which are
``inoperative'',
neither cause nor result). Seven of the fifteen ahetuka vipākacittas
are akusala vipākacittas (results of unwholesome deeds) and eight of
them are kusala vipākacittas (results of wholesome deeds). When a
pleasant or an unpleasant object impinges on the eyesense,
seeing-consciousness only experiences what appears through the eyes,
there is no like or dislike yet of the object. Seeing-consciousness is
an ahetuka vipākacitta. Cittas which like or dislike the object arise
later on; these are sahetuka cittas (arising with hetus). Seeing is not
the same as thinking of what is seen. The citta which pays attention to
the shape and form of something and knows what it is, does not
experience an object through the eye-door but through the mind-door; it
has a different characteristic. When one uses the word
``seeing''
one usually means: paying attention to the shape and form of something
and knowing what it is. However, there must also be a kind of citta
which merely sees visible object, and this citta does not know anything
else. What we see we can call ``visible
object'' or
``colour'';
what is meant is: what appears through the eyes. When there is hearing,
we can experience that hearing has a characteristic which is different
from seeing; the citta which hears experiences sound through the ears.
Only in being aware of the different characteristics of realities and
investigating them over and over again, will we come to know them as
they are. People may think that there is a self who can see and hear at
the same time, but through which door can the self be experienced? The
belief in a self is wrong view.

Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and the experience of tangible object
through the bodysense do not arise without conditions; they are the
results of kamma. Eyesense, earsense, smelling-sense, tasting-sense and
bodysense are rūpas which are produced by kamma, they are the corporal
result of kamma. Only the mental result of kamma is called vipāka, and
thus only citta and cetasika (mental factors arising with the citta)
can be vipāka. Rūpa is not vipāka.

The Buddha taught that everything which arises must have conditions for
its arising. When we see something unpleasant there must be a condition
for it: it is the result of akusala kamma. Akusala vipāka cannot be the
result of kusala kamma. Seeing something pleasant is kusala vipāka;
this can only be the result of kusala kamma. The vipākacitta which
experiences an unpleasant or pleasant object through one of the five
senses is ahetuka. At that moment there are no akusala hetus
(unwholesome roots) or sobhana hetus (beautiful roots) arising with the
citta. 

Seeing-consciousness, hearing-consciousness and the other
sense-cognitions which experience a pleasant object or an unpleasant
object through the corresponding sense-doors are ahetuka vipākacittas.
There are two kinds of ahetuka vipāka experiencing an object through
each of the five sense-doors: one is akusala vipāka and one is kusala
vipāka. Thus there are five pairs of ahetuka vipākacittas which arise
depending on the five sense-doors. There are also other kinds of
ahetuka vipākacitta which will be dealt with later on. The ten ahetuka
vipākacittas which are the five pairs are called in Pāli:
dvi-pañca-viññāṇa (two times five viññāṇa @footnote{“dvi” is “two” and
“pañca” is “five”.}). Summing them up they are:

@enumerate

@item
Seeing-consciousness (cakkhu-viññāṇa,
``cakkhu''
means eye): akusala vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling
(upekkhā): kusala vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling.

@item
Hearing-consciousness (sota-viññāṇa,
``sota''
means ear): akusala vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling: kusala
vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling.

@item
Smelling-consciousness (ghāna-viññāṇa,
``ghāna''
means nose): akusala vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling: kusala vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling.

@item
Tasting-consciousness (jivhā-viññāṇa,
``jivhā''
means tongue): akusala vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling:
kusala vipāka, accompanied by indifferent feeling.

@item
Body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa,
``kāya''
means body): akusala vipāka, accompanied by painful bodily feeling (dukkha-vedanā):
kusala vipāka, accompanied by pleasant bodily feeling (sukha-vedanā).

@end enumerate

The ahetuka vipākacittas which see, hear, smell and taste are invariably
accompanied by indifferent feeling, upekkhā, no matter whether they are
akusala vipāka or kusala vipāka. The citta which dislikes the object
may arise afterwards. This citta is
``sahetuka'',
with hetus (roots), and it is accompanied by unpleasant feeling. Or the
citta which likes the object may arise; this citta which is also
``sahetuka'',
with roots, may be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by indifferent
feeling. We are inclined to think that the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas, such as
seeing or hearing, can occur at the same time as like or dislike of the
object, but this is not so. Different cittas arise at different moments
and the feelings which accompany the cittas are different too; these
realities arise each because of their own conditions and they are
non-self. 

The feeling arising with body-consciousness which experiences tangible
object through the bodysense cannot be indifferent feeling; it arises
either with painful bodily feeling or with pleasant bodily feeling.
When an unpleasant tangible object is experienced the feeling which
accompanies the ahetuka vipākacitta is painful bodily feeling,
dukkha-vedanā. When a pleasant tangible object is experienced the
feeling which accompanies the ahetuka vipākacitta is pleasant bodily
feeling, sukha-vedanā. Painful bodily feeling and pleasant bodily
feeling are nāma which can arise only with the vipākacitta which
experiences an object through the bodysense. Bodily feeling is
conditioned by impact on the bodysense. Both bodily feeling and mental
feeling are nāma, but they arise because of different conditions and at
different moments. For example, we may have pleasant bodily feeling
when we are in comfortable surroundings, but in spite of that, we may
still be worried and also have moments of
``mental''
unpleasant feeling which accompanies dosa-mūla-citta; these feelings
arise at different moments and because of different conditions.
Pleasant bodily feeling is the result of kusala kamma. The mental
unpleasant feeling which arises when we are unhappy is conditioned by
our accumulation of dosa (aversion); it is akusala. The whole day there
are tangible objects experienced through the bodysense, which is a kind
of rūpa. Tangible object can be experienced all over the body, also
inside the body, and thus the door of the bodysense can be anywhere in
the body. Whenever we touch hard or soft objects, when cold or heat
contacts the body, and when we move, bend or stretch, there are
unpleasant or pleasant objects experienced through the bodysense. One
may wonder whether at each moment there is a bodily impression,
pleasant bodily feeling or painful bodily feeling arises. One may
notice the coarse bodily feelings, but not the subtle bodily feelings.
For example, when something is a little too hard, too cold or too hot,
there is painful bodily feeling, dukkha-vedanā, arising with the
ahetuka vipākacitta which experiences the object through the bodysense.
One may not notice the subtle bodily feelings if one has not learned to
be aware of realities.

The arahat, when he experiences an unpleasant object or a pleasant
object through the bodysense, has painful bodily feeling or pleasant
bodily feeling arising with the ahetuka vipākacitta which is
body-consciousness, but he has no akusala cittas or kusala cittas after
the vipākacitta; instead he has kiriyacittas
(``inoperative
cittas'' @footnote{The arahat does
not perform kusala kamma or akusala kamma, deeds which produce results.
For him there is no kamma which could produce rebirth.}). We read in
the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings about
Feeling, Book I, paragraph 6) that the Buddha said to the monks:

@quotation

``The untaught manyfolk, monks, feels
feeling that is pleasant, feeling that is painful and feeling that is
neutral. The well-taught ariyan disciple, monks, feels the same three
feelings. 

Now herein, monks, what is the distinction, what is the specific
feature, what is the difference between the well-taught ariyan disciple
and the untaught manyfolk?''

``For us, lord, things are rooted in the
Exalted One@enddots{}''

`` The untaught manyfolk, monks, being
touched by feeling that is painful, weeps and wails, cries aloud,
knocks the breast, falls into utter bewilderment. For he feels a
twofold feeling, bodily and mental@dots{}Touched by that painful feeling
he feels repugnance for it. Feeling that repugnance for the painful
feeling, the lurking tendency to repugnance fastens on him. Touched by
the painful feeling, he delights in pleasant feeling. Why so? The
untaught manyfolk, monks, knows of no refuge from painful feeling save
sensual pleasure. Delighting in that sensual pleasure, the lurking
tendency to sensual pleasure fastens on
him@enddots{}''

@end quotation

Is this not real life? Touched by painful feeling, we long for pleasant
feeling; we believe that it is real happiness. We do not see life as it
really is: dukkha. We wish to ignore sickness, old age and death,
``lamentation and
despair'', and the impermanence of
all conditioned realities. We expect happiness in life and when we have
to suffer we think that pleasant feeling might cure us of suffering and
we cling to it. In the Buddha's teaching of the
``Dependent
Origination'' @footnote{In Pāli:
Paṭiccasamuppāda. The teaching of the conditionality of all nāmas and
 rūpas of our life.} it is said that feeling conditions craving.
Not only pleasant feeling and indifferent feeling condition craving,
but also unpleasant feeling conditions craving, since one wishes to be
liberated from unpleasant feeling (Visuddhimagga, XVII, 238).
Furthermore, we read in the sutta:

@quotation
@dots{}If he feels feeling that is pleasant, he feels it as one in bondage.
If he feels feeling that is painful, he feels it as one in bondage. If
he feels feeling that is neutral, he feels it as one in bondage. This
untaught manyfolk, monks, is called `in bondage to
birth, death, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and despair. He is in
bondage to dukkha'. So I declare.

But, monks, the well-taught ariyan disciple, when touched by painful
feeling, weeps not, wails not, cries not aloud, knocks not the breast,
falls not into utter bewilderment. He feels but one feeling, the
bodily, not the mental@dots{}@footnote{He feels bodily pain, not mental
pain.} If he feels a feeling that is pleasant, he feels it as one
freed from bondage. If he feels a feeling that is painful, he feels it
as one that is freed from bondage. If he feels a neutral feeling, he
feels it as one that is freed from bondage. This well-taught ariyan
disciple, monks, is called `freed from the bondage of
birth, old age, from sorrow and grief, from woe, lamentation and
despair, freed from the bondage of dukkha.' So I
declare@enddots{}''

@end quotation

Feelings arise because of conditions and fall away again. They are
impermanent and they should not be taken for self. We read in the
Kindred Sayings (Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Third
Fifty, paragraph  130, Hāliddaka):

@quotation

Once the venerable Kaccāna the Great was staying among the folk of
Avanti, at Osprey's Haunt, on a sheer mountain crag.
Then the housefather Hāliddakāni came to the venerable Kaccāna the
Great. Seated at one side he said this:

`` It has been said by the Exalted One,
sir, `Owing to diversity in elements arises diversity
of contact. Owing to diversity of contact arises diversity of
feeling.' Pray, sir, how far is this
so?''

``Herein, housefather, after having seen
with the eye a pleasant object, a monk comes to know as such @footnote{
The P.T.S. translation has: at the thought “This is such and such”,
comes to know  eye-consciousness that is a pleasant experience.} 
eye-consciousness that is a pleasant experience. Owing to contact that
is pleasant to experience arises happy feeling.

After having seen with the eye an unpleasant object, a monk comes to
know as such eye-consciousness that is an unpleasant experience. Owing
to contact that is unpleasant to experience arises unpleasant feeling.

After having seen with the eye an object that is of indifferent effect,
a monk comes to know as such eye-consciousness that experiences an
object which is of indifferent effect. Owing to contact that is
indifferent to experience arises feeling that is indifferent.

So also, housefather, after having heard a sound with the ear, smelt a
scent with the nose, tasted a savour with the tongue, experienced
tangible object with the body, cognized with the mind a mental object
that is pleasant@dots{}Owing to contact that is pleasant to experience
arises happy feeling. But after having cognized a mental object which
is unpleasant@dots{}owing to contact that is unpleasant to experience
arises unhappy feeling. Again, after having cognized with the mind a
mental object that is indifferent in effect, he comes to know as such
mind-consciousness that experiences an object which is of indifferent
effect. Owing to contact that is indifferent arises feeling that is
indifferent. Thus, housefather, owing to diversity in elements arises
diversity of contact. Owing to diversity of contact arises diversity of
feeling.''

@end quotation

If we are mindful of realities which appear through the different
doorways we will come to know from direct experience different
characteristics of nāmas and rūpas; we will know different types of
citta and different kinds of feeling. We will understand that all these
realities are only conditioned elements and not self. We will know from
direct experience that there are not only cittas accompanied by lobha,
dosa and moha, and cittas accompanied by
``beautiful''
roots, but also cittas which are ahetuka, cittas without roots. One may
not find it useful and interesting to know more about seeing, hearing
and the other realities appearing through the different doorways.
However, in order to see things as they are, it is essential to know
that the citta which, for example hears sound, has a characteristic
which is different from the citta which likes or dislikes the sound and
that these cittas arise because of different conditions. What the
Buddha taught can be proved by being mindful of realities. 

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Which are the six hetus (roots)?

@item
When there is seeing it may be kusala vipāka or akusala vipāka. Are
there hetus accompanying seeing-consciousness?

@end enumerate    

@node Ahetuka Cittas which are Unknown in Daily Life
@chapter Ahetuka Cittas which are Unknown in Daily Life

There are eighteen types of ahetuka citta, cittas arising without hetu
(root). Fifteen types of ahetuka cittas are vipāka. As we have seen,
ten of these fifteen cittas are dvi-pañca-viññāṇas (five pairs). They
are the pairs of:

@itemize

@item
seeing-consciousness

@item
hearing-consciousness

@item
smelling-consciousness

@item
tasting-consciousness

@item
body-consciousness

@end itemize

Each of these is a pair of which one is akusala vipāka and one kusala
vipāka. 

Seeing-consciousness is the result of kamma. When it is the result of an
ill deed, seeing-consciousness is akusala vipākacitta which experiences
an unpleasant object; when it is the result of a good deed, it is
kusala vipākacitta which experiences a pleasant object. The function of
seeing-consciousness is experiencing visible object.

Kamma which produces the vipākacitta which is seeing-consciousness does
not only produce that type of vipākacitta, it also produces two other
types of vipākacitta which succeed seeing-consciousness.
Seeing-consciousness is succeeded by another vipākacitta which receives
the object. This citta, which still has the same object as
seeing-consciousness, is called the receiving-consciousness,
sampaṭicchana-citta. Visible object which is experienced by
seeing-consciousness does not fall away when seeing-consciousness falls
away, because it is rūpa; rūpa does not fall away as rapidly as nāma.
When an object is experienced through one of the six doors, there is
not merely one citta experiencing that object, but there is a series or
process of cittas succeeding one another, which share the same object. 

If the seeing-consciousness is akusala vipāka, the sampaṭicchana-citta
(receiving-consciousness) is also akusala vipāka; if the
seeing-consciousness is kusala vipāka, the sampaṭicchana-citta is also
kusala vipāka. Thus, there are two types of sampaṭicchana-citta: one is
akusala vipāka and one is kusala vipāka. Sampaṭicchana-citta is ahetuka
vipāka; there are no akusala hetus (unwholesome roots) or sobhana hetus
(beautiful roots) arising with this type of citta. Sampaṭicchana-citta
succeeds seeing-consciousness; seeing-consciousness is a condition for
the arising of sampaṭicchana-citta. Likewise, when there is
hearing-consciousness which hears sound, sampaṭicchana-citta succeeds
hearing-consciousness. It is the same with regard to the other
sense-doors. 

Sampaṭicchana-citta always arises with upekkhā (indifferent feeling), no
matter whether the sampaṭicchana-citta is akusala vipāka or kusala
vipāka. 

After the sampaṭicchana-citta has arisen and fallen away, the process of
cittas experiencing an object is not yet over. The sampaṭicchana-citta
is succeeded by another ahetuka vipākacitta which is still the result
of kamma. This type of citta is called investigating-consciousness,
santīraṇa-citta. Santīraṇa-citta investigates or considers the object
which was experienced by one of the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas
(``the five
pairs''), and which was
``received''
by the sampaṭicchana-citta. Santīraṇa-citta succeeds
sampaṭicchana-citta in a process of cittas experiencing an object
through one of the five sense-doors; sampaṭicchana-citta is a condition
for the arising of santīraṇa-citta. When seeing has arisen,
sampaṭicchana-citta succeeds the seeing-consciousness, and
santīraṇa-citta succeeds the sampaṭicchana-citta in the process of
cittas which experience visible object. It is the same with the
santīraṇa-citta which arises in the process of cittas experiencing an
object through one of the other sense-doors; it succeeds the
sampaṭicchana-citta. We cannot choose whether santīraṇa-citta should
arise or not; cittas arise because of conditions, they are beyond
control.

Santīraṇa-citta is also an ahetuka vipākacitta. When the object is
unpleasant, the santīraṇa-citta is akusala vipāka and it is accompanied
by upekkhā (indifferent feeling). As regards santīraṇa-citta which is
kusala vipāka, there are two kinds. When the object is pleasant but not
extraordinarily pleasant, santīraṇa-citta is accompanied by upekkhā.
When the object is extraordinarily pleasant, the santīraṇa-citta is
accompanied by somanassa, pleasant feeling. Thus, there are three kinds
of santīraṇa-citta in all. It depends on conditions which kind of
santīraṇa-citta arises.

Thus, there are fifteen types of ahetuka citta which are vipāka.
Summarising them, they are: 

@itemize

@item
 10 cittas which are dvi-pañca-viññāṇa (five pairs)

@item
 1 sampaṭicchana-citta (receiving-consciousness) which is akusala vipāka

@item
 1 sampaṭicchana-citta which is kusala vipāka

@item
 1 santīraṇa-citta (investigating-consciousness) which is akusala
vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā (indifferent feeling)

@item
 1 santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā

@item
 1 santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by somanassa (pleasant feeling)

@end itemize

Seven types of the ahetuka vipākacittas are akusala vipāka and eight
types are kusala vipāka, since there are two types of santīraṇa-citta
which are kusala vipāka.

There are altogether eighteen ahetuka cittas. Of these eighteen ahetuka
cittas fifteen are vipākacittas and three are @dfn{kiriyacittas}.
Kiriyacittas are different from akusala cittas and kusala cittas and
from vipākacittas. Akusala cittas and kusala cittas are cittas which
are cause; they can motivate ill deeds and good deeds which are capable
of producing their appropriate results. Vipākacittas are cittas which
are the result of akusala kamma and kusala kamma. Kiriyacittas are
cittas which are neither cause nor result. 

One type of ahetuka kiriyacitta is the
five-door-adverting-consciousness, in Pāli: pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta
@footnote{“Pañca” is five, “dvāra” is door, “āvajjana” is adverting or
turning towards.}. When an object impinges on one of the five senses,
there has to be a citta which adverts or turns towards the object
through that sense-door. When visible object impinges on the eyesense,
there has to be the adverting-consciousness which adverts to visible
object through the eye-door, the eye-door-adverting-consciousness
(cakkhu-dvārāvajjana-citta;
``cakkhu''
means
``eye''),
before there can be seeing-consciousness (cakkhu-viññāṇa). When sound
impinges on the earsense, the ear-door-adverting-consciousness (
sota-dvārāvajjana-citta;
``sota''
means
``ear'')
has to advert to the sound through the ear-door before there can be
hearing-consciousness (sota-viññāṇa). The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta
merely turns towards the object which impinges on one of the five
senses. It turns, for example, towards the visible object or sound
which impinges on the corresponding sense-organ, but it does not see or
hear. The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta is an ahetuka kiriyacitta, it arises
without hetu (root); there is not yet like or dislike when this citta
arises. The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta is succeeded by one of the
dvi-pañca-viññāṇas, which is vipākacitta. Each citta which arises in
the process of cittas experiencing an object has its own function.

The cittas which experience an object through one of the sense-doors do
not know anything else but that object. When one, for example, is
reading, the citta which sees experiences only visible object and it
does not know the meaning of the letters. After the eye-door process
has been completed visible object is experienced through the mind-door
and then there can be other mind-door processes of cittas which know
the meaning of what has been written and which think about it. Thus,
there are processes of cittas which experience an object through one of
the senses and processes of cittas which experience an object through
the mind-door.

Another type of ahetuka kiriyacitta is the
mind-door-adverting-consciousness, in Pāli: mano-dvārāvajjana citta.
This type of citta arises both in the sense-door process and in the
mind-door process but it performs two different functions according as
it arises in each of those two kinds of processes, as we will see.

When an object contacts one of the sense-doors, the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (five-sense-door-adverting consciousness)
turns towards the object, one of the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas experiences it,
sampaṭicchana-citta receives the object and santīraṇa-citta
investigates it. The process of cittas experiencing the object through
that sense-door is, however, not yet over. The santīraṇa-citta is
succeeded by an ahetuka kiriyacitta which experiences the object
through that sense-door and
``determines''
that object, the determining-consciousness, in Pāli: votthapana-citta
@footnote{Votthapana can be translated as “fixing”, “establishing” or
“determining”.}. It is actually the same type of citta as the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta (mind-door-adverting-consciousness, the first
citta of the mind-door process), but when it arises in a sense-door
process it can be called votthapana-citta, since it performs the
function of votthapana, determining the object, in the sense-door
process. The votthapana-citta, after it has determined the object, is
followed by akusala cittas or by kusala cittas @footnote{Except in the
case of arahats who have neither kusala cittas nor akusala cittas, but
 kiriyacittas instead.}. The votthapana-citta itself is neither
akusala citta nor kusala citta; it is kiriyacitta. This citta which
determines the object is anattā, non-self. There is no self who can
determine whether there will be akusala cittas or kusala cittas. The
akusala cittas or kusala cittas which succeed the votthapana-citta are
non-self either; it depends on one's accumulations of
akusala and kusala whether the votthapana-citta will be succeeded by
akusala cittas or by kusala cittas. 

The cittas arising in a sense-door process which experience a sense
object such as colour or sound, arise and fall away, succeeding one
another. When the sense-door process of cittas is finished, the sense
object experienced by those cittas has also fallen away. Cittas arise
and fall away extremely rapidly and very shortly after the sense-door
process is finished, a mind-door process of cittas starts, which
experience the sense object which has just fallen away. Although it has
fallen away, it can be object of cittas arising in a mind-door process.
The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is the first citta of the mind-door
process, it adverts through the mind-door to the object which has just
fallen away. In the sense-door process the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta
adverts to the object which has not fallen away yet. For example, it
adverts to visible object or sound which is still impinging on the
appropriate sense-door. The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta which arises in the
mind-door process, however, can experience an object which has fallen
away already. It adverts, for example, to visible object which has been
experienced through the eye-door or to sound which has been experienced
through the ear-door. After the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta has adverted to
the object it is succeeded by either kusala cittas or akusala cittas
(in the case of non-arahats), which experience that same object. The
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is neither akusala citta nor kusala citta; it
is kiriyacitta. It depends on one's accumulations by
which types of cittas the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is succeeded: by
akusala cittas or by kusala cittas. All cittas arise because of their
own conditions; they are anattā, not a person, not self.

The ahetuka kiriyacitta which is classified as mano-dvārāvajjana-citta
can perform two functions: in the mind-door process it performs the
function of āvajjana or adverting, it adverts to the object through the
mind-door; in the sense-door process this citta performs the function
of votthapana or determining the object. The citta which determines the
object in the sense-door process can be called, after its function, the
votthapana-citta @footnote{Among the 89 types of citta there is no
special type of citta which is votthapana-citta; the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta serves the function of votthapana.}. 

 When sound impinges on the earsense it can be experienced by cittas
arising in the ear-door process and after that it is experienced by
cittas arising in a mind-door process. Processes of cittas which
experience an object through one of the five senses and through the
mind-door succeed one another time and again.

How can there be akusala cittas or kusala cittas in the process of
cittas which experience an object through one of the sense-doors, when
one does not even know yet what is experienced? There can be
akusala cittas or kusala cittas before one knows what it is. One can
compare this situation with the case of a child who likes a brightly
coloured object such as a balloon before it knows that the object is a
balloon. We can have like or dislike of an object before we know what
it is.

Another ahetuka kiriyacitta is the hasituppāda-citta, the
smile-producing-consciousness of the arahat. Only arahats have this
type of citta. When they smile the hasituppāda-citta may arise at that
moment. Smiling can be motivated by different types of cittas. When
people who are not arahats smile, it may be motivated by lobha or by
kusala citta. Arahats do not have any defilements; they do not have
akusala cittas. Neither do they have kusala cittas; they do not
accumulate any more kamma. Instead of kusala cittas they have
kiriyacittas accompanied by sobhana (beautiful) roots, sobhana
kiriyacittas. Arahats do not laugh aloud, because they have no
accumulations for laughing; they only smile. When they smile the
smiling may be motivated by sobhana kiriyacitta or by the ahetuka
kiriyacitta which is called hasituppāda-citta. 

Thus, of the eighteen ahetuka cittas, fifteen are ahetuka vipākacittas
and three are ahetuka kiriyacittas. The three ahetuka kiriyacittas are:

@itemize

@item
1 Pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta ( five-door-adverting-consciousness).

@item
2 Mano-dvārāvajjana-citta ( mind-door-adverting-consciousness), which
performs the function of adverting to the object through the mind-door
when it arises in the mind-door process and which performs the function
of votthapana (determining the object) when it arises in the sense-door
process. 

@item
3 Hasituppāda-citta ( smile-producing-consciousness).

@end itemize

Those who are not arahats can have only seventeen of the eighteen types
of ahetuka citta. These seventeen types of ahetuka citta arise in our
daily life. When an object impinges on one of the five senses, the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (the five-door-adverting-consciousness) turns
towards the object through that sense-door. This citta is followed by
pañca-viññāṇa (one of the ten cittas which are the
``five
pairs'') which experiences the
object, by sampaṭicchana-citta which receives it, by santīraṇa-citta
which investigates it and by votthapana-citta which determines the
object and then by akusala cittas or kusala cittas. When the cittas of
the sense-door process have fallen away the object is experienced
through the mind-door. The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the
object through the mind-door and is then followed by akusala cittas or
kusala cittas. There is ``unwise
attention'' (ayoniso manasikāra) to
the object which is experienced if akusala cittas arise, and there is
``wise
attention'' (yoniso manasikāra) to
the object if kusala cittas arise. For example, when we see insects
there may be dislike and then there are dosa-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted
in aversion. Thus there is unwise attention. The dosa may be so strong
that one wants to kill the insects; then there is akusala kamma. If one
realizes that killing is akusala and one abstains from killing, there
are kusala cittas and thus there is wise attention. If one studies the
Dhamma and develops vipassanā, insight, it is a condition for wise
attention to arise more often. When we are mindful of the nāma or rūpa
which appears through one of the sense-doors or through the mind-door,
there is wise attention at that moment.

When there are two people in the same situation, one person may have
unwise attention and the other may have wise attention, depending on
their accumulations. We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV,
Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Fourth Fifty, chapter V,
paragraph  202, Lustful) about the monk, who, after he has experienced an object
through one of the six doors, has unwise attention, and about the monk
who has wise attention. We read that Mahā-Moggallāna said to the monks:

@quotation

Friends, I will teach you the way of lusting and also of not lusting@enddots{}

And how, friends, is one lustful? 

Herein, friends, a monk, seeing an object with the eye, feels attachment
for objects that charm, feels aversion from objects that displease,
abides without having established mindfulness of the body, and his
thoughts are mean. He realizes not, in its true nature, that
emancipation of heart, that emancipation of wisdom, wherein those evil,
unprofitable states that have arisen cease without remainder.

This monk, friends, is called ``lustful
after objects cognizable by the eye, nose, tongue@dots{}objects cognizable
by the mind.'' When a monk so abides,
friends, if Māra @footnote{The “Evil One”. Māra stands for everything
which is unwholesome and dukkha,  suffering.} come upon him by way
of the eye, Māra gets an opportunity. If Māra come upon him by way of
the tongue@dots{}by way of the mind, Māra gets access, gets opportunity@enddots{}

So dwelling, friends, objects overcome a monk, a monk overcomes not
objects. Sounds overcome a monk, a monk overcomes not sounds. Scents,
savours, tangibles and mind-states overcome a monk, a monk overcomes
not sounds, scents, savours, tangibles and mind-states. This monk,
friends, is called ``conquered by
objects, sounds, scents, savours, tangibles and mind-states, not
conqueror of them.'' Evil,
unprofitable states, passion-fraught, leading to rebirth overcome him,
states unhappy, whose fruit is pain, whose future is rebirth, decay and
death. Thus, friends, one is lustful.

And how, friends, is one free from lust? 

Herein, friends, a monk, seeing an object with the eye, is not attached
to objects that charm, nor averse from objects that displease@enddots{}

Tasting a savour with the tongue@dots{}with mind cognizing a mind-state, he
is not attached to mind-states that charm, nor is he averse from
mind-states that displease, but dwells, having established mindfulness
of the body and his thought is boundless. So that he realizes in its
true nature that emancipation of heart, that emancipation of wisdom,
wherein those evil, unprofitable states that have arisen come to cease
without remainder.

This monk, friends, is called ``not
lustful after objects cognizable by the eye@dots{}not lustful after
mind-states cognizable by the mind.''
Thus dwelling, friends, if Māra come upon him by way of the eye, of the
tongue, of the mind@dots{}Māra gets no access, gets no opportunity@enddots{}

Moreover, friends, so dwelling a monk conquers objects, objects do not
conquer him. He conquers sounds, scents, savours, tangibles,
mind-states. They do not conquer him. Such a monk, friends, is called,
``conqueror of objects, sounds, scents,
savours, tangibles and mind-states.''
He is conqueror, not conquered. He conquers those evil, unprofitable
states, passion-fraught, inciting to lust, leading to rebirth, states
unhappy, whose fruit is pain, rebirth, decay and death. Thus, friends,
is one free from lust.

@end quotation

@heading Questions 

@enumerate

@item
What is kiriyacitta?

@item
When we smile, is it always motivated by lobha, attachment?

@item
Can akusala cittas and kusala cittas arise in a sense-door process?

@end enumerate    

@node The First Citta in Life
@chapter The First Citta in Life

Time and again there are cittas arising which experience different
objects through the senses and through the mind-door. There are seeing
or hearing, there are cittas with attachment to what is seen or heard.
These cittas arise because of different conditions. Seeing and the
citta with attachment to visible object do not arise at the same time,
they are different and they perform different functions. We will
understand more about cittas if we know in what order they arise and
which function they perform. Each citta has its own function (in Pāli:
kicca). There are fourteen functions of citta in all. 

The citta arising at the first moment of life must also have a function.
What is birth, and what is it actually that is born? We speak about the
birth of a child, but in fact, there are only nāma and rūpa which are
born. The word
``birth''
is a conventional term. We should consider what birth really is. Nāma
and rūpa arise and fall away all the time and thus there is birth and
death of nāma and rūpa all the time. In order to understand what causes
birth we should know what conditions the nāma and rūpa which arise at
the first moment of a new lifespan.

What arises first at the beginning of our life, nāma or rūpa? At any
moment of our life there have to be both nāma and rūpa. In the planes
of existence where there are five khandhas (four nāmakkhandhas and one
rūpakkhandha), nāma cannot arise without rūpa; citta cannot arise
without the body @footnote{There are different planes of
existence where one can be born and not in all of  them are both
nāma and rūpa. In some planes there is only nāma and in one plane 
there is only rūpa.}. What is true for any moment of our life is also
true for the first moment of our life. At the first moment of our life
nāma and rūpa have to arise at the same time. The citta which arises at
that moment is called the rebirth-consciousness or @dfn{paṭisandhi-citta}
@footnote{Paṭisandhi means relinking, it “links” the previous
life to the present life. It  is usually translated as
rebirth-consciousness, but, since there is no person who is 
reborn, birth-consciousness would be more correct.}. Since there
isn't any citta which arises without conditions, the
paṭisandhi-citta must also have conditions. The paṭisandhi-citta is the
first citta of a new life and thus its cause can only be in the past.
One may have doubts about past lives, but how can people be so
different if there were no past lives? We can see that people are born
with different accumulations. Can we explain the character of a child
only by the parents? What we mean by
``character''
is actually nāma. Could parents transfer to another being nāma which
falls away as soon as it has arisen? There must be other factors which
are the condition for a child's character. Cittas
which arise and fall away succeed one another and thus each citta
conditions the next one. The last citta of the previous life
(dying-consciousness) is succeeded by the first citta of this life.
That is why tendencies one had in the past can continue by way of
accumulation from one citta to the next one and from past lives to the
present life. Since people accumulated different tendencies in past
lives, they are born with different tendencies and inclinations.

We do not only see that people are born with different characters, we
also see that they are born in different surroundings; some people are
born in pleasant surroundings and some people are born in miserable
surroundings. In order to understand this we should not cling to
conventional terms such as
``person''
or
``surroundings''.
If we think in terms of paramattha dhammas we will see that being in
pleasant or miserable surroundings is nothing else but the receiving of
pleasant or unpleasant objects through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and
bodysense. It is kusala vipāka or akusala vipāka. Vipāka (result) does
not arise without conditions; it is caused by good or bad deeds, by
kamma. Different people perform different kamma and each deed brings
its own result. The fact that people are born in different surroundings
must have a condition: it is conditioned by kamma performed in a
previous life. Kamma causes one to be born. The paṭisandhi-citta is the
result of kamma; it is vipāka. 

In this world we see different births of people and of animals. When we
compare the life of an animal with the life of a human being, we notice
that being born an animal is sorrowful; it is akusala vipāka. Being
born a human being is kusala vipāka, even if one is born poor or if one
has to experience many unpleasant things during one's
life. The paṭisandhi-cittas of different people are of many different
degrees of kusala vipāka because the kusala kammas which produced them
were of different degrees.

At the first moment of our life kamma produces the paṭisandhi-citta and
then rūpa has to arise at the same time. One may wonder what the cause
is of the rūpa arising at the first moment of life. We see that people
are born with different bodily features: some are strong, some are
weak, some are handicapped from birth. This must have a cause. It is
kamma which causes both nāma and rūpa to be born. 

Could the rūpa we call ``dead
matter'' and the rūpa we call
``plant''
be produced by kamma? A plant is not
``born''
because a plant cannot perform good and bad deeds; it has no kamma that
could cause its birth. Temperature is the condition for the life of a
plant. As regards human beings, kamma produces rūpa at the moment the
paṭisandhi-citta arises. There couldn't be life if
kamma did not produce rūpa from the first moment of life. There are
four factors which produce different rūpas of the body. As we have seen
kamma is one factor. The other factors are: citta, temperature and
nutrition. Kamma produces rūpa at the moment the paṭisandhi-citta
arises and after that the other factors also start to produce rūpas.
Temperature produces rūpa; if there were not the right temperature the
new life could not develop. Temperature produces rūpa throughout our
life. As soon as the paṭisandhi-citta has fallen away, at the moment
the next citta arises, citta too starts to produce rūpa, and it
produces rūpa throughout our life. Furthermore, nutrition produces rūpa
so that the body can grow. It produces rūpa throughout our life. Thus
we see that there are four factors which produce rūpas of the body.

As regards rūpas which are not of the body but rūpas outside, such as
rūpas in dead matter or in plants, these are produced solely by
temperature.

Kamma produces rūpa not only at the first moment of life but throughout
our life. Kamma does not only produce the vipākacittas which experience
pleasant and unpleasant objects through the sense-doors, it also
produces throughout our life the rūpas which can function as the
sense-doors through which these objects are received. Could we for
instance create our own eyesense? It could not be produced by
temperature, only by kamma. Transplantation of the eye cannot be
successful unless kamma produces eyesense in the body of the receiver. 

Birth by way of the mother's womb is not the only way
of birth. We learn from the teachings that there can be birth in four
different ways: by way of the womb, by way of eggs, by way of moisture
and by way of spontaneous birth. 

People would like to know when life starts in the
mother's womb. We cannot determine the exact moment.
Life starts at the moment the paṭisandhi-citta arises together with the
rūpa which is at the same time produced by kamma. A lifespan ends when
the last citta, the dying-consciousness (cuti-citta) falls away. So
long as the dying-consciousness has not fallen away there is still
life. One cannot know the moment the dying-consciousness of someone
else arises and falls away unless one has cultivated the knowledge of
the cittas of other people. A Buddha or someone else who has cultivated
this special kind of knowledge could know the exact moment of
someone's death.

We may wonder which kamma in our life will produce the paṭisandhi-citta
of the next life. Some people believe that by doing many good deeds in
this life they can be assured of a happy rebirth. But the kamma which
produces rebirth will not necessarily be from this life. We have in
past lives as well as in this life performed both akusala kamma and
kusala kamma and these kammas are of different degrees. Some kammas
produce results in the same life in which they have been performed,
some produce result in the form of rebirth-consciousness of a future
life, or they produce result in the course of a future life. We have
performed deeds in past lives which could produce rebirth but which
have not yet come to fruition. We cannot know which kamma will produce
our next rebirth.

If akusala kamma produces the rebirth of the next life there will be an
unhappy rebirth. In that case the cittas which arise shortly before the
dying-consciousness are akusala cittas and they experience an
unpleasant object. The paṭisandhi-citta of the next life which succeeds
the cuti-citta (the dying-consciousness), experiences that same
unpleasant object. If kusala kamma produces the rebirth there will be a
happy rebirth. In that case kusala cittas arise shortly before the
cuti-citta and they experience a pleasant object. The paṭisandhi-citta
of the next life experiences that same pleasant object.

People want to know whether they can ensure a happy rebirth for
themselves by controlling the last cittas before the cuti-citta, by
inducing them to be kusala. Some people invite monks to chant at the
deathbed of a dying person in order to help him to have kusala cittas.
However, nobody can be sure that his rebirth will be a happy one,
unless he has attained one of the stages of enlightenment. One cannot
have power over one's cittas. Can we control our
thoughts now, at this moment? Since we cannot do this, how could we
control our thoughts at the time shortly before dying? There is no self
who can decide about his rebirth in a next life. After the last akusala
cittas or kusala cittas in life have fallen away, the cuti-citta
arises. The cuti-citta is succeeded by the paṭisandhi-citta of the next
life. When the paṭisandhi-citta arises a new lifespan starts. So long
as there is kamma there will be future lives.

The paṭisandhi-citta performs the function of rebirth or relinking. It
``links''
the past to the present. Since only the first citta of a lifespan
performs the function of rebirth there is only one paṭisandhi-citta in
a life. There is no self who transmigrates from one life to the next
life; there are only nāma and rūpa arising and falling away. The
present life is different from the past life but there is continuity in
so far as the present life is conditioned by the past. Since the
paṭisandhi-citta succeeds the cuti-citta of the previous life, the
accumulated tendencies of past lives go on to the paṭisandhi-citta.
Thus, inclinations one has in the present life are conditioned by the
past. 

The paṭisandhi-citta is the result of a previous good deed or bad deed
committed in the past. The object the paṭisandhi-citta experiences is,
as we have seen, the same as the object experienced by the last akusala
cittas or kusala cittas which arose before the cuti-citta of the
previous life. The Visuddhimagga (XVII, 164-168) explains by way of
similes that although the present is different from the past there is
continuity. The being who is born is not the same as the being of the
past life, but it is conditioned by the past. There is
``neither absolute identity nor
absolute otherness'', as the
Visuddhimagga explains. We read with regard to the paṭisandhi-citta:

@example

An echo, or its like, supplies
The figures here; connectedness
By continuity denies
Identity and otherness.

@end example

@quotation

And here let the illustration of this consciousness be such things as an
echo, a light, a seal impression, a looking glass image, for the fact
of its not coming here from the previous becoming and for the fact that
it arises owing to causes that are included in past becomings. For just
as an echo, a light, a seal impression, and a shadow, have respectively
sound, etc., as their cause and come into being without going
elsewhere, so also this consciousness.

And with the stream of continuity there is neither identity nor
otherness. For if there were absolute identity in a stream of
continuity, there would be no forming of curd from milk. And yet if
there were absolute otherness, the curd would not be derived from milk.
And so too with all causally arisen things@dots{}So neither absolute
identity nor absolute otherness should be assumed here.

@end quotation

One is glad to be born if one does not realize that birth is the result
of kamma and that one will go forth in the cycle of birth and death so
long as there is kamma. Not seeing the dangers of birth is ignorance.
At this moment we are in the human plane of existence but so long as we
have not attained any stage of enlightenment we cannot be sure that
there will not be rebirth in one of the woeful planes. We all have
performed both akusala kamma and kusala kamma in different lives. Who
knows which of those deeds will produce the paṭisandhi-citta of the
next life, even if we continue doing good deeds? Some people think that
birth in a heavenly plane is desirable, but they do not realize that
life in a heavenly plane does not last and that, after a lifespan in
heaven is over, an ill deed previously performed could produce a
paṭisandhi-citta in a woeful plane.

We read in the ``Discourse on Fools and
the Wise'' (Middle Length Sayings
III, 129) that the Buddha, when he was staying in the Jeta Grove, in
Anāthapiṇḍika monastery, spoke to the monks about
the sufferings in hell and about the anguishes of animal birth. The
Buddha said:

@quotation

``In many a disquisition could I, monks,
talk a talk about animal birth, but it is not easy to describe in full,
monks, so many are the anguishes of animal birth.

Monks, it is like a man who might throw a yoke with one hole into the
sea. An easterly wind might take it westwards, a westerly wind might
take it eastwards, a northerly wind might take it southwards, a
southerly wind might take it northwards. There might be a blind turtle
there who came to the surface once in a hundred years. What do you
think, monks? Could that blind turtle push his neck through that one
hole in the yoke?''

``If at all, revered sir, then only once
in a very long while.''

``Sooner or later, monks, could the
blind turtle push his neck through the one hole in the yoke; more
difficult than that, do I say, monks, is human status once again for
the fool who has gone to the Downfall. What is the cause of that?
Monks, there is no dhamma-faring there, no even-faring, no doing of
what is skilled, no doing of what is good. Monks, there is devouring of
one another there and feeding on the weak. Monks, if some time or other
once in a very long while that fool came to human status (again), he
would be born into those families that are low: a family of low caste
or a family of hunters or a family of bamboo-plaiters or a family of
cartwrights or a family of refuse-scavengers, in such a family as is
needy, without enough to drink or to eat, where a covering for the back
is with difficulty obtained. Moreover, he would be ill-favoured, ugly,
dwarfish, sickly, blind or deformed or lame or paralysed; he would be
unable to get food, drink, clothes, vehicles, garlands, scents and
perfumes, bed, dwelling and lights; he would fare wrongly in body,
wrongly in speech, wrongly in thought. Because he had fared wrongly in
body, speech and thought, at the breaking up of the body after dying he
would arise in the sorrowful ways, a bad bourn, the Downfall, Niraya
Hell@enddots{}

@dots{}This, monks, is the fool's condition, completed in
its entirety@enddots{}''

@end quotation

The Buddha spoke about the dangers of birth in many different ways. He
said that birth is dukkha (sorrow); it is followed by old age, sickness
and death. He pointed out the foulness of the body and he reminded
people that also at this very moment the body is dukkha, impermanent
and non-self. If we continue taking mind and body for self there will
be no end to the cycle of birth and death. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (II, Nidāna-vagga, chapter XV, Kindred
Sayings on the Incalculable Beginning, paragraph 10, A Person) that the Buddha,
when he was in Rājagaha, on Vulture's Peak, said to
the monks:

@quotation

Incalculable is the beginning, monks, of this faring on. The earliest
point is not revealed of the running on, faring on of beings, cloaked
in ignorance, tied by craving@enddots{}

The bones of one single person, monks, running on, faring on for an aeon
would be a cairn, a pile, a heap as great as Mount Vepulla, were there
a collector of those bones and the collection were not destroyed.

How is this? Incalculable is the beginning, monks, of this faring on.
The earliest point is not revealed of the running on, faring on of
beings, cloaked in ignorance, tied by craving@enddots{}

Thus spoke the Exalted One. After the Wellfarer had said this, he spoke
further:

@end quotation

@example

The pile of bones (of all the bodies of) one man
Who has alone one aeon lived,
Were heaped a mountain high  @minus{} so said the mighty seer  @minus{} 
Yes, reckoned high as Vipula
To north of Vulture's Peak, crag-fort of Magadha.
When he with perfect insight sees
The Ariyan Truths:  @minus{} what dukkha is and how it comes
And how it may be overpassed,
The Ariyan Eightfold Path, the way all ill to abate  @minus{} 
Seven times at most reborn, a man
Yet running on, through breaking every fetter down,
Endmaker does become of dukkha.

@end example

It is fortunate to be born in the human plane where we can cultivate
insight. When the first stage of enlightenment (the stage of the
sotāpanna) has been attained, the four noble Truths have been directly
understood. Then we will not be reborn more than seven times and we can
be sure that there will eventually be an end to rebirth.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
How many functions of citta are there in all?

@item
The four classes, jātis, of citta are: akusala, kusala, vipāka and
kiriya. Of which jāti is the paṭisandhi-citta?

@item
Is birth as a human being always the result of kusala kamma?

@item
When does human life start?

@item
Why is birth sorrow (dukkha)?

@end enumerate 

@node Different Types of Rebirth-Consciousness
@chapter Different Types of Rebirth-Consciousness

We see many different beings in this world, men and animals, all with a
different appearance and with a different character. They must have
been different from the first moment of their lives, from the moment of
rebirth-consciousness, paṭisandhi-citta. We may be inclined to think
that there must be many types of paṭisandhi-citta, but, on the other
hand, beings who are born in this world also have many things in
common. We share the same world and we receive impressions through the
senses, no matter whether we are rich or poor. On account of the
objects which we experience through the six doors, kusala cittas and
akusala cittas arise. All these cittas, arising in daily life, are
cittas of the sense-sphere, kāmāvacara cittas.
``@dfn{Kāma}''
means ``sensual
enjoyment'' or
``object of sensual
enjoyment''. However, kāmāvacara
cittas are not only cittas rooted in attachment, lobha; they are all
the cittas pertaining to the sense sphere. 

Human birth is the result of kusala kamma. The paṭisandhi-citta arising
in the human plane of existence where there are sense impressions is
the result of kusala kamma performed by kāmāvacara cittas, cittas
pertaining to the
``sense-sphere''.
It cannot be the result of jhānacittas which are not kāmāvacara cittas.
The jhānacittas arising when there is calm to the degree of
``absorption''
do not experience objects which present themselves through the five
senses. Jhānacittas cannot cause birth in this world. Thus, beings born
in the human plane of existence have in common that their
paṭisandhi-citta is the result of kusala kamma performed by kāmāvacara
cittas. As regards the many varieties of human birth, this is due to
the degree of kusala kamma which produced the paṭisandhi-citta.

One could divide human beings as regards their birth into two classes,
but each of these two classes includes many degrees of vipāka. The two
classes are:

@enumerate

@item
Those who are born with a paṭisandhi-citta which is ahetuka kusala
vipāka (which means that the kusala vipākacitta is not accompanied by
beautiful roots: by alobha or non-attachment, by adosa or non-aversion,
or by paññā or wisdom)

@item
Those who are born with a paṭisandhi-citta which is sahetuka kusala
vipāka (kusala vipāka accompanied by beautiful roots)

@end enumerate

When a human being is born with a paṭisandhi-citta which is ahetuka, his
birth is the result of kāmāvacara kusala kamma (kamma performed by
kusala cittas of the sense-sphere), but the degree of the kusala kamma
is less than the kusala kamma which produces a sahetuka
paṭisandhi-citta, a paṭisandhi-citta with
``beautiful''
roots (sobhana hetus). People who are born with an ahetuka
paṭisandhi-citta are handicapped from the first moment of life.
Eyesense or earsense does not develop or they have other defects.
However, when we see someone who is handicapped we cannot tell whether
there was at the first moment of his life an ahetuka paṭisandhi-citta
or a sahetuka paṭisandhi-citta. We cannot tell whether someone was
handicapped from the first moment of his life or whether he became
handicapped later on, even while he was still in his
mother's womb, and thus we do not know which type of
paṭisandhi-citta he was born with. The fact that a person is
handicapped has not happened by chance; it is due to
one's kamma.

There is only one type of paṭisandhi-citta which is ahetuka kusala
vipāka, but there are many degrees of this vipāka depending on the
kamma which produces it: there can be birth in different surroundings,
in unpleasant surroundings, though not in woeful planes, and in
pleasant surroundings. This type of paṭisandhi-citta can even arise in
the lowest heavenly plane. 

There is also an ahetuka paṭisandhi-citta which is akusala vipāka. This
type of citta does not arise in the human plane, but in a woeful plane.
Only one type of paṭisandhi-citta is akusala vipāka, but it is of many
degrees. There are many varieties of akusala kamma and thus there must
be many varieties of unhappy rebirth. The unhappy rebirth we can see in
this world is birth as an animal. There are three more classes of
woeful planes, which we cannot see; they are the world of petas
(ghosts), the world of asuras (demons), and the hell planes. There are
different kinds of hell planes because there are many degrees of
akusala kamma which produce different kinds of unhappy rebirth. 

The function of paṭisandhi can be performed by different types of
vipākacittas which are the results of different kammas. It depends on
kamma which type of vipākacitta performs the function of paṭisandhi in
the case of a particular being. The paṭisandhi-citta, the first citta
in life, does not arise within a sense-door process or a mind-door
process of cittas experiencing an object which impinges on one of the
six doors. It merely performs the function of rebirth. 

There are two ahetuka vipākacittas which can perform the function of
paṭisandhi, namely: santīraṇa akusala vipākacitta and santīraṇa kusala
vipākacitta. As we have seen (in chapter 9), santīraṇa-citta is an
ahetuka vipākacitta. When santīraṇa-citta arises in a sense-door
process of cittas experiencing an object through one of the five
senses, it performs the function of investigating (santīraṇa) the
object. However, santīraṇa-citta can also perform the function of
rebirth, and this is the case when the paṭisandhi-citta is ahetuka
vipāka. The same type of citta can perform more than one function, but
at different moments and at different occasions. When santīraṇa-citta
performs the function of paṭisandhi it does not arise in a sense-door
process and it does not investigate an object. 

As we have seen (in chapter 9), there are three kinds of
santīraṇa-citta:

@enumerate

@item
Santīraṇa-citta which is akusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā
(indifferent feeling)

@item
Santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā

@item
Santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by somanassa (pleasant feeling)

@end enumerate

The santīraṇa-citta which is akusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā, can
perform the function of paṭisandhi in woeful planes. This means that
the type of paṭisandhi-citta arising in woeful planes is of the same
type as the akusala vipākacitta which is santīraṇa-citta performing the
function of investigating in a sense-door process of cittas.

The santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā, can,
apart from the function of investigating in a sense-door process, also
perform the function of paṭisandhi in the human plane and in the lowest
heavenly plane.

The santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by somanassa,
does not perform the function of paṭisandhi. 

Akusala kamma and kusala kamma of different beings can produce nineteen
different types of paṭisandhi-citta in all, arising in different planes
of existence. One of these types is akusala vipāka and eighteen types
are kusala vipāka. Of the types of citta which are kusala vipāka, one
type is ahetuka kusala vipāka and seventeen types are sahetuka kusala
vipāka (accompanied by beautiful roots). There are many degrees of each
of these nineteen types of paṭisandhi-citta because kamma can be of
many degrees. It is due to kamma that people are born ugly or beautiful
and that they are born in unpleasant or in pleasant surroundings. The
fact that one is born into miserable circumstances does not mean that
one's next birth will also be into miserable
circumstances. It all depends on the kamma which has been accumulated
and which produces result. As regards people who are born into happy
circumstances, if akusala kamma produces their next birth, this will be
an unhappy one. 

We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Fours, chapter IX, paragraph 5,
Darkness):

@quotation

Monks, these four persons are found existing in the world. What four?

He who is in darkness and bound for darkness; he who is in darkness but
bound for light; he who is in light but bound for darkness; he who is
in light and bound for light.

And how, monks, is a person in darkness bound for darkness?

In this case a certain person is born in a low family, the family of a
scavenger or a hunter or a basket-weaver or wheelwright or sweeper, or
in the family of some wretched man hard put to it to find a meal or
earn a living, where food and clothes are hard to get. Moreover, he is
ill-favoured, ugly, dwarfish, sickly, purblind, crooked, lame or
paralysed, with never a bite or sup, without clothes, vehicle, without
perfumes or flower-garlands, bed, dwelling or lights. He lives in the
practice of evil with body, speech and thought; and so doing, when body
breaks up, after death, he is reborn in the waste, the way of woe, the
downfall, in hell. Thus, monks, is the person who is in darkness and
bound for darkness.

And how, monks, is a person in darkness but bound for light? 

In this case a certain person is born in a low family@dots{}without bed,
dwelling or lights. He lives in the practice of good with body, speech
and thought@dots{}and so doing, when body breaks up, after death he is
reborn in the happy bourn, in the heaven-world.

And how, monks, is a person in light but bound for darkness?

In this case a certain person is born in a high family@enddots{}

And that man is well-built, comely and charming, possessed of supreme
beauty of form. He is one able to get clothes, vehicle, perfumes and
flower-garlands, bed, dwelling and lights. But he lives in the practice
of evil with body, speech and thought. So doing, when body breaks up,
after death he is reborn in the waste, the way of woe, the downfall, in
hell. Thus, monks, is the person who is in light but bound for
darkness.

And how, monks, is a person who is in light and bound for light?

In this case a person is born in a high family@dots{}able to get clothes@enddots{}
bed, dwelling and lights. He lives in the practice of good with body,
speech and thought. So doing, when body breaks up after death, he is
reborn in the happy bourn, in the heaven-world. Thus, monks, is one who
is in light and bound for light. 

These, monks, are the four persons found existing in the world.

@end quotation

The kusala kamma producing a paṭisandhi-citta which is sahetuka vipāka
(with beautiful roots) is of a higher degree than the kusala kamma
producing an ahetuka paṭisandhi-citta. Kāmāvacara kusala kammas (kusala
kammas of the ``sense
sphere'') can produce eight different
types of sahetuka vipākacittas which can perform the function of
paṭisandhi. Which type of vipākacitta performs this function in the
case of a particular being depends on the kusala kamma which produces
it.

People are born with different characters and with different capacities;
they are born with different degrees of wisdom or without wisdom. The
paṭisandhi-cittas of people are different. When the paṭisandhi-citta is
sahetuka, it is always accompanied by alobha (non-attachment or
generosity) and adosa (non-aversion or kindness), but not always by
wisdom. It can be accompanied by wisdom or it can be without wisdom,
depending on the kamma which produces it. When the paṭisandhi-citta is
accompanied by wisdom, one is born with three sobhana hetus (beautiful
roots): alobha, adosa and paññā. Someone who is born with wisdom is
more inclined to develop wisdom in the course of his life than someone
who is born without wisdom. Those who are born with a paṭisandhi-citta
accompanied by wisdom can attain enlightenment if they cultivate the
eightfold Path. If one is born without wisdom one can still develop
right understanding, but in that life one cannot attain enlightenment.
Thus we see that everything in our life depends on conditions.

Apart from the difference in the number of roots (two hetus or three
hetus) which accompany the sahetuka paṭisandhi-citta there are other
differences. Kusala kamma which produces the paṭisandhi-citta can be
kamma performed by kusala citta with somanassa, pleasant feeling, or
with upekkhā, indifferent feeling; by kusala citta which is
``unprompted''
(not induced, asaṅkhārika) or by kusala citta which is
``prompted''
(induced, sasaṅkhārika) @footnote{See Ch. 4. Kusala cittas can arise
unprompted, spontaneously, or prompted,  induced either by someone
else or by one’s own deliberation.}. Several factors determine the
nature of kusala kamma which produces its result accordingly. The
sahetuka paṭisandhi-cittas which are the results of kāmāvacara kusala
kammas can be classified as eight different types in all. Summing them
up they are:

@enumerate

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wisdom, unprompted.
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-sampayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ @footnote{
Ñāṇa is wisdom (paññā).}). 

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wisdom, prompted.
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-sampayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wisdom, unprompted. 
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).  

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wisdom, prompted.
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wisdom, unprompted.
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-sampayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wisdom, prompted.
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-sampayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@item
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wisdom,
unprompted. (Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wisdom, prompted. (Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ).

@end enumerate

It is useful to know more details about paṭisandhi-citta, because it can
help us to understand why people are so different. The eight types of
sahetuka paṭisandhi-citta which are the results of kāmāvacara kusala
kammas do not arise only in the human plane, but they also arise in
those heavenly planes of existence which are
``sensuous''
planes of existence, @dfn{kāma-bhūmi}. 

Eleven planes are kāma-bhūmis (or kāma-lokas), sensuous planes of
existence, and of these one is the plane of human beings, six are
heavenly planes and four are woeful planes. Beings born in one of the
kāma-bhūmis receive sense impressions, they have kāmāvacara cittas.
There are also higher heavenly planes which are not kāma-bhūmi. There
are thirty-one classes of planes of existence in all @footnote{This
will be explained in chapter 20, Planes of Existence.}. 

If one is born in one of the kāma-bhūmis and cultivates jhāna,
absorption, one can, besides kāmāvacara cittas, also have
rūpa-jhānacittas and arūpa-jhānacittas @footnote{For the difference
between rūpa-jhāna, fine-material jhāna, and arūpa-jhāna, immaterial 
jhāna, see chapter 22.}. If one cultivates the eightfold Path
one can have lokuttara cittas, supramundane cittas which directly
experience nibbāna.

When someone attains jhāna, the kusala kamma he performs is not
kāmāvacara kusala kamma; at the moment of jhāna there are no sense
impressions. The kusala kamma which is jhāna does not produce result in
the same lifespan one attains it, but it can produce result in the form
of paṭisandhi-citta, the paṭisandhi-citta of the next life. In that
case there are jhānacittas arising shortly before death and the
paṭisandhi-citta of the next life experiences the same object as those
jhānacittas.

The result of rūpāvacara kusala citta (kusala citta which is
rūpa-jhānacitta) is birth in a heavenly plane which is not kāma-bhūmi
but a rūpa-brahma-plane (fine-material world). The result of an
arūpāvacara kusala citta (kusala citta which is arūpa-jhānacitta) is
birth in a heavenly plane which is an arūpa-brahma plane (immaterial
world). There are different rūpa-brahma-planes and arūpa-brahma planes.

There are five stages of rūpa-jhāna and thus there are five types of
rūpāvacara kusala citta which can produce five types of rūpāvacara
vipākacitta. There are four stages of arūpa-jhāna and thus there are
four types of arūpāvacara kusala citta which can produce four types of
arūpāvacara vipākacitta. Therefore, there are five types of
paṭisandhi-citta which are the results of rūpāvacara kusala cittas and
four types of paṭisandhi-citta which are the results of arūpāvacara
kusala cittas. Altogether there are nine types of paṭisandhi-citta
which are the results of the different types of jhānacittas. They are
sahetuka vipākacittas and they are always accompanied by paññā. 

Summarising the nineteen types of paṭisandhi-citta:

@itemize

@item
 1 akusala vipāka santīraṇa-citta (ahetuka, result of akusala kamma)

@item
 1 kusala vipāka santīraṇa-citta (ahetuka, result of kāmāvacara kusala
kamma)

@item
 8 mahā-vipākacittas (sahetuka, results of kāmāvacara kusala
kammas)@footnote{The terms mahā-kusala, mahā-vipāka and mahā-kiriya
are used for kāmāvacara  cittas.} 

@item
 5 rūpāvacara vipākacittas (sahetuka, results of rūpa-jhānacittas)

@item
 4 arūpāvacara vipākacittas (sahetuka, results of arūpa-jhānacittas)

@end itemize

We do not know which of our deeds will produce the paṭisandhi-citta of
our next life. Even a deed performed in a former life can produce the
paṭisandhi-citta of the next life. The Buddha encouraged people to
perform many kinds of kusala kamma. Each good deed is very valuable; it
is certain to bear its fruit sooner or later. We read in As it was said
(Khuddaka Nikāya,
``Itivuttaka'',
the Ones, chapter III, paragraph 6) about the value of generosity. The Buddha
said to the monks:

@quotation

Monks, if beings knew, as I know, the ripening of sharing gifts they
would not enjoy their use without sharing them, nor would the taint of
stinginess obsess the heart and stay there. Even if it were their last
bit, their last morsel of food, they would not enjoy its use without
sharing it, if there were anyone to receive it@enddots{}

@end quotation

Kusala kamma can cause a happy rebirth, but the end of birth is to be
preferred to any kind of rebirth. If one cultivates the eightfold Path
and attains arahatship there will be no more rebirth. The
dying-consciousness (cuti-citta) of the arahat is not succeeded by a
paṭisandhi-citta. The Buddha reminded people of the dangers of birth
and encouraged them to be mindful, in order to attain the
``deathless''
which is nibbāna. We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Eights,
chapter VIII, paragraph 4) that the Buddha, when he was staying at Nādika, in
the Brick Hall, said to the monks:

@quotation

Mindfulness of death, monks, when made become, when developed is very
fruitful, of great advantage, merging and ending in the deathless.

And how, monks, is it so@enddots{}?

Take the case of a monk, who, when the day declines and night sets in,
reflects thus: ``Many indeed are the
chances of death for me. A snake or scorpion or a centipede might bite
me and might cause my death; that would be a hindrance to me. I might
stumble and fall; the food I have eaten might make me ill; bile might
convulse me; phlegm choke me; winds (within me) with their scissor-like
cuts give me ache; or men or non-humans might attack me and might cause
my death. That would be a hindrance to
me.'' 

Monks, that monk must reflect thus:
``Are there any evil and wrong states
within me that have not been put away and that would be a hindrance to
me were I to die tonight?'' If,
monks, on consideration he realize that there are such states@dots{}then
to put away just those evil and wrong states, an intense resolution,
effort, endeavour, exertion, struggle, mindfulness and self-possession
must be made by that monk.

Monks, just as a man whose turban is on fire, or whose hair is burning,
would make an intense resolution, effort, endeavour, exertion,
struggle, mindfulness and self-possession to put out his (burning)
turban or hair; even so, monks, an intense resolution, effort,
endeavour, exertion, struggle, mindfulness and self-possession must be
made by that monk to put away just those evil and wrong states.

But if that monk, on review, realize that there are no such states
within him that have not been put away which would be a hindrance to
him, were he to die that night  @minus{} then let that monk live verily in joy
and gladness, training himself day and night in the ways of
righteousness.

Take the case, monks, of a monk who reflects likewise@dots{}when the night
is spent and day breaks. He must reflect in the same way@enddots{}

Monks, mindfulness of death when so made become, so developed is very
fruitful, of great advantage, merging and ending in the deathless.

@end quotation

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Can the paṭisandhi-citta be ahetuka?

@item
How many types of paṭisandhi-citta are there?

@item
How many types of paṭisandhi-citta are akusala vipāka?

@item
When the paṭisandhi-citta is accompanied by wisdom, by which factor
is this conditioned?

@end enumerate

@node The Function of Bhavanga (Life-Continuum)
@chapter The Function of Bhavanga (Life-Continuum)

There are moments when there are no sense-impressions, when one does not
think, when there are no akusala cittas or kusala cittas. Is there at
those moments still citta? Even when there are no sense-impressions and
no thinking there must be citta; otherwise there would be no life. The
type of citta which arises and falls away at those moments is called
bhavanga-citta. @dfn{Bhavanga} literally means
``factor of
life''; bhavanga is usually
translated into English as
``life-continuum''.
The bhavanga-citta keeps the continuity in a lifespan, so that what we
call a
``being''
goes on to live from moment to moment. That is the function of the
bhavanga-citta.

One may wonder whether bhavanga-cittas often arise. There must be
countless bhavanga-cittas arising at those moments when there are no
sense-impressions, no thinking, no akusala cittas or kusala cittas.
When we are asleep and dreaming akusala cittas and kusala cittas arise,
but even when we are in a dreamless sleep there still has to be citta.
There are bhavanga-cittas at such moments. Also when we are awake
countless bhavanga-cittas arise; they arise in between the different
processes of citta. It seems that hearing, for example, can arise very
shortly after seeing, but in reality there are different processes of
citta and in between these processes bhavanga-cittas arise. 

The bhavanga-citta succeeds the first citta in life, the
paṭisandhi-citta, rebirth-consciousness. When the rebirth-consciousness
falls away it conditions the arising of the next citta, the second
citta in that life and this is the first bhavanga-citta in life. 

The bhavanga-citta is vipākacitta; it is the result of the same kamma
which produced the paṭisandhi-citta. There is only one paṭisandhi-citta
in a life, but there are countless bhavanga-cittas. Not only the first
bhavanga-citta, but all bhavanga-cittas arising during a lifespan are
the result of the kamma which produced the paṭisandhi-citta. 

The bhavanga-citta is the same type of citta as the paṭisandhi-citta.
There are nineteen types of paṭisandhi-citta and thus there are
nineteen types of bhavanga-citta. If the paṭisandhi-citta is akusala
vipāka, which is the case when there is birth in a woeful plane, all
bhavanga-cittas of that life are akusala vipāka as well. If the
paṭisandhi-citta is ahetuka kusala vipāka, in which case one is
handicapped from the first moment of life, all bhavanga-cittas of that
life are ahetuka kusala vipāka as well. If the paṭisandhi-citta is
sahetuka (arising with sobhana hetus, beautiful roots), the
bhavanga-citta is sahetuka as well. All bhavanga-cittas during a
lifespan are of the same type as the paṭisandhi-citta of that life,
they arise with the same hetus, they are accompanied by the same
cetasikas, mental factors. If one is born with two hetus, with alobha
(non-attachment) and adosa (non-aversion), but without wisdom, then all
bhavanga-cittas have only two hetus. Such a person can cultivate
wisdom, but he cannot become enlightened during that life. If one is
born with three hetus, which means that one is born with alobha, adosa
and paññā (wisdom), all bhavanga-cittas are accompanied by these three
sobhana hetus as well. Thus that person is more inclined to cultivate
wisdom and, if he develops the eightfold Path, he can attain
enlightenment during that life. If one is born with somanassa, happy
feeling, all bhavanga-cittas of that life are accompanied by somanassa.

Every citta must experience an object and thus the bhavanga-citta too
experiences an object. Seeing has what is visible as object; hearing
has sound as object. The bhavanga-citta does not arise within a process
of cittas and thus it has an object which is different from the objects
which present themselves time and again and are experienced through the
sense-doors and through the mind-door. The bhavanga-citta which is of
the same type of citta as the paṭisandhi-citta also experiences the
same object as the paṭisandhi-citta. 

As we have seen (in chapter 10), the paṭisandhi-citta experiences the
same object as the akusala cittas or kusala cittas which arose shortly
before the dying-consciousness, cuti-citta, of the previous life. If
akusala kamma produces the rebirth of the next life there will be an
unhappy rebirth. In that case akusala cittas arise shortly before the
dying-consciousness and they experience an unpleasant object. The
paṭisandhi-citta of the next life which succeeds the cuti-citta (the
dying-consciousness), experiences that same unpleasant object. If
kusala kamma produces the rebirth there will be a happy rebirth. In
that case kusala cittas arise shortly before the cuti-citta and they
experience a pleasant object. The paṭisandhi-citta of the next life
experiences that same pleasant object. Whatever object is experienced
by the last kusala cittas or akusala cittas of the previous life, the
paṭisandhi-citta experiences that same object. The paṭisandhi-citta is
succeeded by the first bhavanga-citta of that life and this citta
experiences the same object as the paṭisandhi-citta. Moreover, all
bhavanga-cittas of that life experience that same object.

The Visuddhimagga (XIV, 114) states with regard to the bhavanga-citta:

When the paṭisandhi-citta has ceased, then, following on whatever kind
of rebirth-consciousness it may be, the same kinds, being the result of
the same kamma whatever it may be, occur as bhavanga-citta with that
same object; and again those same kinds. And as long as there is no
other kind of arising of consciousness to interrupt the continuity,
they also go on occurring endlessly in periods of dreamless sleep,
etc., like the current of a river.

The bhavanga-cittas are like the current of a river and this current is
interrupted when an object presents itself through one of the senses or
through the mind-door. When the cittas of the sense-door process or the
mind-door process have fallen away, the current of bhavanga-cittas is
resumed.

When an object contacts one of the five senses the stream of
bhavanga-cittas is interrupted and there is a sense-cognition. However,
there cannot be a sense-cognition immediately. When sound, for example,
impinges on the earsense, there is not immediately hearing. There are
still some bhavanga-cittas arising and falling away before the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (five-door-adverting consciousness) adverts to
the sound through the ear-door and hearing arises. The bhavanga-cittas
do not perform the function of adverting to the sound which contacts
the earsense, they do not experience the sound. They have their own
function which is keeping the continuity in a lifespan, and they
experience their own object which is the same as the object of the
paṭisandhi-citta. Although the bhavanga-citta does not experience the
sound which contacts the earsense, it can be affected,
``disturbed''
by it and then the stream of bhavanga-cittas will be interrupted and
sound will be experienced by cittas which arise in the ear-door
process. One may wonder how the bhavanga-citta which experiences its
own object can still be
``affected''
by an object which impinges on one of the doorways. Each citta can
experience only one object at a time but the bhavanga-citta can still
be affected by an object which impinges on one of the doorways. A
commentary to the Visuddhimagga, the Paramattha-Mañjūsa, (478; see
Visuddhimagga XIV, 115, footnote 46) explains this by way of a simile:

@dots{}But how does there come to be disturbance (movement) of the bhavanga
that has a different support? Because it is connected with it. And here
the example is this: when grains of sugar are put on the surface of a
drum and one of the grains of sugar is tapped, a fly sitting on another
grain of sugar moves.

When a rūpa which is one of the sense objects contacts one of the
senses, there is first one moment of bhavanga-citta arising and falling
away which is denoted by the name atīta-bhavanga or
``past
bhavanga''. This citta is succeeded
by the bhavanga-calana or ``vibrating
bhavanga''. It is called
``vibrating
bhavanga'' because it is disturbed by
the object, although it does not experience that object. The last
bhavanga-citta which arises before the stream of bhavanga-cittas is
interrupted and the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the object, is
the bhavangupaccheda or
``arrest-bhavanga'',
so called because the stream of bhavanga-cittas is arrested after this
citta.

The different names which denote these bhavanga-cittas do not represent
different functions; bhavanga-cittas have as their only function to
keep the continuity in the life of a being. The different names only
indicate that these bhavanga-cittas are the last ones before the stream
is interrupted and a new object which impinges on one of the doorways
is experienced by a process of cittas. When the bhavangupaccheda, the
arrest-bhavanga, has arisen and fallen away, a sense-door process of
cittas which experience an object through one of the sense-doors can
begin. When the sense-door process is over, the stream of
bhavanga-cittas is resumed, so that the series of cittas succeeding one
another in our life is not interrupted. The object which impinged on
one of the senses is then experienced through the mind-door. In between
the sense-door process and the mind-door process, however, there are
bhavanga-cittas. When the cittas of the mind-door process have fallen
away, the stream of bhavanga-cittas is resumed. 

A sense object which is experienced through one of the five senses is
rūpa. Rūpa arises and falls away, but it does not fall away as rapidly
as nāma. One rūpa which impinges on one of the senses, can be
experienced by several cittas succeeding one another in a process.
When, for example, the rūpa which is sound impinges on the earsense, it
can be experienced by cittas arising in the ear-door process. Before
the process starts there are bhavanga-cittas. The last bhavanga-cittas
which arise before the sound can be experienced by the cittas of the
ear-door process are:

@itemize

@item
atīta-bhavanga (past bhavanga)

@item
bhavanga-calana (vibrating bhavanga)

@item
bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga)

@end itemize

When the stream of bhavanga-cittas has been arrested, the
ear-door-adverting-consciousness (sota-dvārāvajjana-citta) adverts to
the object through the ear-door. The following cittas in that process
which each perform their own function can experience the sound before
it falls away. The duration of one material unit, a rūpa, has been
determined by the commentaries as seventeen moments of citta. The
number seventeen should be seen as a comparative notion which is
expressed here @footnote{See Ven. Nyanaponika, “Abhidhamma Studies”,
The Problem of Time.}. The cittas in a complete sense-door process of
cittas, including three bhavanga-cittas which arise before the
impinging rūpa is experienced, are seventeen in number. Later on (in
chapter 15) I will deal in more detail with all the cittas arising in a
process. Within this process each citta performs its own function while
they experience a rūpa which has not fallen away yet. Therefore, the
duration of a rūpa has been counted as seventeen moments of citta which
succeed one another in a process @footnote{The commentaries count the
duration of rūpa as sixteen or seventeen moments of citta. Although the
scriptures do not expressively mention these numbers, they refer to the
different cittas in processes which each perform their own function
while they experience an object, as I explained in my preface.}. We
cannot count these moments, we cannot imagine the shortness of time of
a process of cittas; one citta lasts shorter than a flash of lightning.

A process of cittas does not always run its full course. When a rūpa
impinges on one of the senses, it may happen that more than one moment
of bhavanga-citta passes before the bhavanga-calana, which precedes the
bhavangupaccheda; in that case the rūpa which has impinged on one of
the senses does not survive until the process is completed since it
cannot last longer than seventeen moments of citta. A process can,
after it has started, be interrupted, for example, after the
votthapana-citta (determining-consciousness), and then there are no
kusala cittas or akusala cittas in that process @footnote{According to
the Atthasālinī II, Book I , Part X, Ch 2, 269, the object is in that
case weak.}. It may also happen that the atīta-bhavanga is succeeded by
the bhavanga-calana which is
``disturbed''
by the object, but that the rūpa then falls away. In that case there is
no bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga); the stream of bhavanga-cittas is
not interrupted and the sense-door process cannot start. Sound may, for
example, impinge on the earsense and then the atīta-bhavanga is
succeeded by the bhavanga-calana. However, the bhavangupaccheda does
not arise and thus the current of bhavanga-cittas is not interrupted
and the ear-door process cannot start. In that case the sound cannot be
heard.

When a sense-door process of cittas begins, the rūpa which has impinged
on that sense-door is experienced. When the sense-door process of
cittas which experience a rūpa such as visible object or sound is over,
that object has also fallen away. Cittas succeed one another extremely
rapidly and very shortly after the sense-door process of cittas is
over, a mind-door process of cittas begins. The cittas of the mind-door
process which follows upon the sense-door process experience through
the mind-door the rūpa which has just fallen away. Before the mind-door
process begins, however, there are bhavanga-cittas. Bhavanga-cittas
arise in between the different processes of cittas. The last two
bhavanga-cittas arising before the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, the
mind-door-adverting consciousness, are the bhavanga-calana (vibrating
bhavanga) and the bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga)@footnote{The atīta
bhavanga, which is merely one moment of bhavanga which elapses before
the bhavanga calana and the subsequent bhavangupaccheda preceding a
sense-door process, is not counted again before the mind-door process
starts.}. Then the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the object
through the mind-door and it is succeeded by seven kusala cittas or
akusala cittas (in the case of non-arahats) @footnote{I will explain
in more detail about these cittas in Chapter 14.}.

Summarising these cittas, they are:

@enumerate

@item
bhavanga-calana (vibrating bhavanga), bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga)

@item
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta (mind-door-adverting-consciousness)

@item
seven akusala or kusala cittas (or, for the arahat: kiriyacittas)
@end enumerate

When the mind-door process is over, the stream of bhavanga-cittas is
resumed until there is again a process of cittas experiencing an object
through one of the sense-doors or through the mind-door. There are
countless bhavanga-cittas arising throughout our life in between the
processes of cittas experiencing an object through one of the
sense-doors or through the mind-door.

What is the mind-door? It is different from the sense-doors. A
``doorway''
is the means through which citta experiences an object. The sense-doors
are the following rūpas: eyesense, earsense, smellingsense,
tastingsense and bodysense. Bodysense is all over the body. These rūpas
are the means through which a sense object is experienced. The
mind-door is not one of these rūpas. In order to understand what the
mind-door is we should consider what the first citta of the mind-door
process is. This citta which performs the function of adverting to the
object is the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, the
mind-door-adverting-consciousness. It does not advert to the object
through one of the five senses but through the mind-door. The mind-door
must be nāma, it is a citta. The citta which precedes the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is the mind-door, it is the means through which
the cittas of the mind-door process, beginning with the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, receive the object. The citta which precedes
the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is the bhavangupaccheda and this citta is
the mind-door. It is the mind-door through which the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the object and it is also the
doorway for the succeeding cittas of that process. 

The study of the different sense-door processes and mind-door processes
which take their course according to conditions will help us to see
realities as elements which are devoid of self, beyond control. We may,
for example, be infatuated with a beautiful sound we hear. What we take
for a long time of hearing are many different moments of citta which do
not last. Even when we do not know yet the origin of the sound, what
kind of sound it is, sound has already been experienced through the
mind-door since cittas succeed one another extremely rapidly, arising
and falling away. Sound does not stay either, it falls away. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, Fourth Fifty, chapter V, paragraph 205, The Lute) that the Buddha said to
the monks:

@quotation
@dots{}Suppose, monks, the sound of a lute has never been heard by a rājah
or royal minister. Then he hears the sound of a lute and says:
``Good men, pray, what is that sound so
entrancing, so delightful, so intoxicating, so ravishing, of such power
to bind?''

Then they say to him: ``That, lord, is
the sound of what is called a lute, that sound so entrancing, so
delightful, so intoxicating, so ravishing, of such power to
bind.''

Then he says: ``Go, my men. Fetch me
that lute.''

So they fetch him that lute and say to him:
``This, lord, is that lute, the sound
of which is so entrancing@dots{}of such power to
bind.''

Then he says: ``Enough of this lute, my
men. Fetch me that sound.''

They say to him: ``This lute so called,
lord, consists of divers parts, a great number of parts. It speaks
because it is compounded of divers parts, to wit, owing to the belly,
owing to the parchment, the handle, the frame, the strings, owing to
the bridge and proper effort of a player. Thus, lord, this lute, so
called, consists of divers parts, of a great number of parts. It speaks
because it is compounded of divers
parts.''

Then that rājah breaks up that lute into ten or a hundred pieces. Having
done so, he splinters and splinters it again. Having done so, he burns
it in fire, then makes it a heap of ashes and winnows the heap of ashes
in a strong wind or lets them be borne down by the swift stream of a
river.

Then he says: ``A poor thing is what you
call a lute, my men, whatever a lute may be. Herein the world is
exceeding careless and led astray.''

Even so, monks, a monk investigating body as far as there is scope for
body, investigating feeling, perception, the activities
(saṅkhārakkhandha), investigating consciousness, so far as there is
scope for consciousness  @minus{} in all of these investigations, whatever
there be of
``I''
or ``I
am'' or
``Mine'',
there is none of that for him.

@end quotation

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
At which moments do bhavanga-cittas arise?

@item
When did the first bhavanga-citta in life arise?

@item
Can bhavanga-citta be ahetuka?

@item
Can bhavanga-citta be accompanied by wisdom?

@end enumerate

@node Functions of Citta
@chapter Functions of Citta

Each citta has its own function to perform; no citta arises without
performing a function. For example, seeing and hearing are functions
performed by citta. We are not used to considering seeing and hearing
as functions, because we cling to a self. If we want to know more about
cittas we should learn about their different functions (in Pāli:
@dfn{kicca}).

The function performed by the first citta in life is the function of
paṭisandhi (rebirth or
``relinking'').
The paṭisandhi-citta is succeeded by the bhavanga-citta
(life-continuum). The function of bhavanga, life-continuum, is the
second function of citta. The bhavanga-citta keeps the continuity in a
lifespan. So long as one is still alive bhavanga-cittas arise and fall
away during the time there is no sense-door process or mind-door
process of cittas. Bhavanga-cittas arise in between the different
processes of cittas which experience an object through one of the six
doors. For example, seeing and thinking about what was seen arise in
different processes of citta and there have to be bhavanga-cittas in
between the different processes. 

When a rūpa impinges on one of the senses the current of bhavanga-cittas
is interrupted; there are a few more bhavanga-cittas arising and
falling away, and then the five-door-adverting consciousness, the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta, arises. The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta is the
first citta in the process of cittas experiencing the rūpa which has
come into contact with one of the senses.

The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta performs the function of āvajjana or
adverting to the object which impinges on one of the five senses; it
adverts to the object through that sense-door. The
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta is an ahetuka kiriyacitta.

The Visuddhimagga (XIV, 107) states concerning the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (mind-element):

@quotation

Herein, the mind-element has the characteristic of being the forerunner
of eye-consciousness, etc., and cognizing visible data, and so on. Its
function is to advert. It is manifested as confrontation of visible
data, and so on. Its proximate cause is the interruption of (the
continued occurrence of consciousness as) life-continuum (bhavanga). It
is associated with equanimity (upekkhā) only.

@end quotation

The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta is the
``forerunner''
because it arises before seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions
(pañca-viññāṇa). When it adverts to an object which has contacted the
eye-sense, it adverts through the eye-door and it is
eye-door-adverting-consciousness (cakkhu-dvārāvajjana-citta). When it
adverts to an object which has contacted the ear-sense it is the
ear-door-adverting-consciousness (sota-dvārāvajjana-citta). The
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta is named after the sense-door through which it
adverts to the object. The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta arises countless
times a day, but we do not notice it. Whenever there is seeing, the
eye-door-adverting-consciousness has adverted already to the visible
object which has impinged on the eyesense, and it has fallen away
already. Whenever there is hearing or any one of the other
pañca-viññāṇas, the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta has adverted to the object
already and it has fallen away. 

The pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta is succeeded by the other cittas of the
sense-door process which experience that same object. When that process
is over, the object is experienced through the mind-door. First there
are bhavanga-cittas and then the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta
(mind-door-adverting-consciousness) performs the function of āvajjana,
adverting, through the mind-door. 

Thus there are two types of citta which perform the function of
adverting (āvajjana-kicca) these are: the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta
which adverts to the object through one of the five sense-doors and the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta which adverts to the object through the
mind-door. The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is an ahetuka kiriyacitta; it is
not accompanied by unwholesome roots (akusala hetus) or beautiful roots
(sobhana hetus). After it has adverted to the object it is followed by
kusala cittas or by akusala cittas. 

When visible object contacts the eye-sense the
eye-door-adverting-consciousness (cakkhu-dvārāvajjana-citta) adverts to
visible object through the eye-door. When the
eye-door-adverting-consciousness has fallen away it is succeeded by
seeing-consciousness (cakkhu-viññāṇa). The function of seeing (in Pāli:
dassana-kicca) is performed by seeing-consciousness. Seeing is vipāka;
it is the result of kusala kamma or akusala kamma. We are born to
receive the results of our deeds: we see, hear and experience objects
through the other senses. 

The citta which performs the function of seeing only sees visible
object. This citta does not like or dislike, it is an ahetuka
vipākacitta. Neither does it think about the object. If one does not
develop right understanding one does not realize that the citta which
only sees visible object is a reality different from the citta which
likes or dislikes the visible object and different from the citta which
pays attention to shape and form. Because of our accumulated ignorance
and wrong view we do not realize the impermanence of citta which falls
away as soon as it has arisen and which is succeeded by another citta
which is a different reality.

There are only two kinds of citta which can perform the function of
seeing: one is akusala vipāka and one is kusala vipāka. 

When sound has impinged on the earsense and the
ear-door-adverting-consciousness has arisen and fallen away,
hearing-consciousness arises. The function of hearing (in Pāli:
savana-kicca) is another function of citta. Hearing is ahetuka vipāka.
Two kinds of citta can perform the function of hearing: one is akusala
vipāka and one is kusala vipāka. 

Another function of citta is the function of smelling (in Pāli:
ghāyana-kicca). Two kinds of citta which are both ahetuka vipāka can
perform this function: one is akusala vipāka and one is kusala vipāka. 

There are two kinds of ahetuka vipākacitta which can perform the
function of tasting (in Pāli: sāyana kicca): one is akusala vipāka and
one is kusala vipāka. When the citta which performs this function
tastes, for example, a sweet or a salty flavour, it merely experiences
that flavour; it does not know the name of the flavour. The cittas
which know the conventional name of the flavour arise later on.

The function of experiencing tangible object through the bodysense (in
Pāli: phusana-kicca) is another function of citta. When an object
contacts the bodysense, the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the
object through the doorway of the bodysense. It is succeeded by
body-consciousness (kāya-viññāṇa) which performs the function of
experiencing tangible object through the bodysense. Two kinds of citta
which are both ahetuka vipāka can perform this function: one is akusala
vipāka and one is kusala vipāka. The objects experienced by
kāya-viññāṇa are the following rūpas:

@itemize

@item
solidity (experienced as hardness or softness)

@item
temperature (experienced as heat or cold)

@item
motion (experienced as oscillation or pressure)

@end itemize

These objects are experienced through the doorway of the bodysense,
which is rūpa. This rūpa, which has the capacity to receive bodily
impressions, is all over the body, except in those parts where there is
no sensitivity.

Thus, summarising the functions performed by the cittas which are the
pañca-viññāṇas, they are:

@itemize

@item
the function of seeing (dassana-kicca)

@item
the function of hearing (savana-kicca)

@item
the function of smelling (ghāyana-kicca)

@item
the function of tasting (sāyana-kicca)

@item
the function of experiencing tangible object (phusana kicca)

@end itemize

Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and experiencing tangible object are
different functions, not performed by a self but by citta. These cittas
arise because of their appropriate conditions. In order to remind
people of this truth the Buddha explained how cittas experience objects
through the five senses and through the mind-door. He pointed out the
different conditions for the arising of cittas and the impermanence of
these conditions. Since the conditions for the arising of cittas are
impermanent, cittas cannot be permanent. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, Second Fifty, chapter IV, paragraph  93, Duality II) that the Buddha said
to the monks:

@quotation

Owing to a dual (thing), monks, consciousness comes into being. And
what, monks, is that dual owing to which consciousness comes into
being?

Owing to the eye and objects arises eye-consciousness. The eye is
impermanent, changing, its state is
``becoming
otherness''. So also are objects.
Thus this dual, mobile and transitory, impermanent, changing,  @minus{} its
state is ``becoming
otherness''. 

Eye-consciousness is impermanent, changing, its state is
``becoming
otherness''. That condition, that
relation of the uprising of eye-consciousness,  @minus{} they also are
impermanent, changing, their state is
``becoming
otherness''. This eye-consciousness,
arising as it does from an impermanent relation,  @minus{} how could it be
permanent?

Now the striking together, the falling together, the meeting together of
these three things @footnote{That is: eye, visible object and
eye-consciousness.},  @minus{} this, monks, is called
``eye-contact''.
Eye-contact is impermanent, changing, its state is
``becoming
otherness''. That condition, that
relation of the uprising of eye-contact  @minus{} they also are impermanent@enddots{}
This eye-contact, arising as it does from an impermanent relation,-how
could it be permanent?

Contacted, monks, one feels. Contacted, one is aware. Contacted, one
perceives. Thus these states also are mobile and transitory,
impermanent and changing. Their state is
``becoming
otherness''@enddots{}

@end quotation

The same is said with regard to the other doorways.

In the process of citta, the pañca-viññāṇa is succeeded by
sampaṭicchana-citta. This citta which performs the function of
sampaṭicchana, receiving the object, receives the object after the
pañca-viññāṇa has fallen away. Sampaṭicchana-citta is ahetuka vipāka.
Two kinds of citta can perform this function: one is akusala vipāka and
one is kusala vipāka. 

Kamma does not only produce the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas (the five pairs) and
sampaṭicchana-citta, it also produces santīraṇa-citta
(investigating-consciousness) which succeeds sampaṭicchana-citta.
Santīraṇa-citta performs in the sense-door process the function of
investigating the object, santīraṇa; it is ahetuka vipākacitta. The
function of investigating the object is another function of citta,
different from seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, experiencing
tangible object through the bodysense and sampaṭicchana, receiving. 

As we have seen (in chapter 9), there are three kinds of santīraṇa-citta
which can perform the function of investigating:

@enumerate

@item
santīraṇa-citta which is akusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā

@item
santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā

@item
santīraṇa-citta which is kusala vipāka, accompanied by somanassa (when the object is extraordinarily pleasant)

@end enumerate

Santīraṇa-citta is succeeded by votthapana-citta,
determining-consciousness. @dfn{Votthapana} is another function of citta; the
votthapana-citta determines the object in the sense-door process. After
it has determined the object it is succeeded by kusala cittas or by
akusala cittas. Votthapana-citta is not vipāka, it is not kusala or
akusala but it is an ahetuka kiriyacitta. The conditions for its
arising are different from the conditions for santīraṇa-citta which is
produced by kamma. As we have seen (in Chapter 9), the citta which
performs the function of votthapana is the ahetuka kiriyacitta which is
classified as mano-dvārāvajjana-citta. The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta
performs two functions: in the mind-door process it performs the
function of adverting to the object through the mind-door, and in the
sense-door process it performs the function of votthapana and then it
can be called, after its function, votthapana-citta.

Cittas experience pleasant or unpleasant objects through the senses and
through the mind-door. If someone has accumulated a great deal of lobha
and dosa, lobha-mūla-cittas are likely to arise when the object is
pleasant and dosa-mūla-cittas are likely to arise when the object is
unpleasant. At such moments there is
``unwise
attention'' to the object. These
cittas arise because of conditions, they are not self, and beyond
control. 

We are inclined to think that in the process of cittas, akusala
vipākacittas which experience an unpleasant object should necessarily
be followed by akusala cittas, since we let ourselves be ruled by the
objects we experience. However, if there is
``wise
attention'' there is no aversion
towards unpleasant objects. Kusala cittas and akusala cittas arise
because of conditions which are entirely different from the conditions
for vipākacittas. Akusala vipāka and kusala vipāka are the result of
kamma. We wish to control our vipāka, but this is impossible. When it
is time for akusala vipāka, we cannot prevent it from arising. We
should understand that our life is nāma and rūpa, which arise because
of conditions and fall away immediately. If we would truly understand
vipāka as it is: as only a moment of citta which falls away as soon as
it has arisen, we would be less likely to have aversion towards
unpleasant objects we experience.

One may wonder whether it is necessary to know in detail about cittas
and their functions. Is it not enough to know only about kusala cittas
and akusala cittas? Apart from kusala cittas and akusala cittas we
should know also about other kinds of cittas which perform different
functions in the processes of cittas and which arise because of
different conditions. Then there will be more understanding of the fact
that there is no self who can direct the arising of particular cittas
at particular moments. There is no self who can choose to have kusala
cittas. People have different accumulations and thus, when an object
presents itself, kusala cittas or akusala cittas will arise in the
process of cittas which experience that object, according to
one's accumulations. When, for example, different
people smell delicious food, some people may have akusala cittas
whereas others may have kusala cittas. Those who are attached to food
are likely to have lobha-mūla-cittas. In the case of someone who has
accumulations for dāna (generosity), kusala cittas may arise when he
has smelled the food; he may wish to offer food to the monks. In the
case of others again, there may be kusala cittas with paññā which
realizes odour, for example, as only a kind of rūpa, not some
``thing'',
impermanent and devoid of a
``self''.

Through the study of the Dhamma and above all through the development of
``insight'',
right understanding of realities, there can be conditions for kusala
cittas and then there is ``wise
attention'' to the object. No matter
whether the object is pleasant or unpleasant, in the sense-door process
the votthapana-citta can be succeeded by kusala cittas and in the
mind-door process the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta can, after it has
adverted to the object, be succeeded by kusala cittas. If there can be
``wise
attention'' at this moment, there
will be more conditions for ``wise
attention'' in the future.

Kusala cittas and akusala cittas are bound to arise because we have
accumulated both kusala and akusala. People are inclined to blame the
world for the arising of their defilements because they do not know
that defilements are accumulated in the citta; defilements are not in
the objects around ourselves. One might wish to be without the six
doors in order to have no defilements. However, the only way to
eradicate defilements is: knowing the realities which appear through
the six doors. We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga,
Kindred Sayings on Sense, Fourth Fifty, chapter III, paragraph 194, On fire)
that the Buddha said to the monks:

@quotation

I will teach you, monks, a discourse (illustrated) by fire, a
Dhamma-discourse. Do you listen to it. And what, monks, is that
discourse? 

It were a good thing, monks, if the organ of sight were seared with a
red-hot iron pin, on fire, all ablaze, a glowing mass of flame. Then
would there be no grasping of the marks or details of objects
cognizable by the eye. The consciousness might stand fast, being firmly
bound by the satisfaction either of the marks or details (of the
objects). Should one die at such a time, there is the possibility of
his winning one of two destinies, either hell or rebirth in the womb of
an animal. Seeing this danger, monks, do I so declare.

It were a good thing, monks, if the organ of hearing were pierced with
an iron spike, on fire@dots{}if the organ of smell were pierced with a
sharp claw, on fire@dots{}if the organ of taste were seared with a sharp
razor, on fire@dots{}if the organ of touch were seared with a sword, on
fire@dots{}

It were a good thing, monks, to be asleep. For sleep, I declare, is
barren for living things. It is fruitless for living things, I declare.
It is dull for living things, I declare. For (if asleep) one would not
be applying his mind to such imaginations as would enslave him, so that
(for instance) he would break up the Order. Seeing this danger (of
being awake), monks, do I so declare.

As to that, monks, the well-taught ariyan disciple thus reflects:

``Let alone searing the organ of sight
with an iron pin, on fire, all ablaze, a glowing mass of flame; what if
I thus ponder: Impermanent is the eye, impermanent are objects,
impermanent is eye-consciousness, eye-contact, the pleasant or
unpleasant or neutral feeling which arises owing to
eye-contact,  @minus{} that also is
impermanent@enddots{}''

So seeing, the well-taught ariyan disciple is repelled by the eye, by
objects, by eye-consciousness, by eye-contact. He is repelled by that
pleasant or unpleasant or neutral feeling that arises owing to
eye-contact@dots{}Being repelled he is dispassionate. Dispassionate, he is
set free. By freedom comes the knowledge,
``I am
freed'', so that he realizes:
``Destroyed is rebirth. Lived is the
righteous life. Done is the task. For life in these conditions there is
no hereafter.''

Such, monks, is the Dhamma-discourse (illustrated) by fire.

@end quotation

This sutta reminds us to be mindful at this moment, when we are seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, experiencing objects through the bodysense
or through the mind-door. All these moments are functions, performed by
different cittas which do not last.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Which citta in a sense-door process determines the object before it
is succeeded by akusala cittas or by kusala cittas? Is it accompanied by hetus
(roots) or is it ahetuka?

@item
Which citta in the mind-door process precedes the kusala cittas or
akusala cittas arising in that process? What is its function?

@item
Is the citta which in the mind-door process precedes  the kusala
cittas or akusala cittas the first citta in  that process experiencing the
object?

@item
Can this citta be accompanied by wisdom?

@item
Sound is experienced through the ear-door and through the mind-door.
Has the sound fallen away when it is experienced through the mind-door?

@item
How many types of citta can perform the function of  adverting to
the object, āvajjana ? 

@end enumerate

@node The Function of Javana
@chapter The Function of Javana

When we see, hear, smell, taste, experience an object through the
bodysense or through the mind-door, there is not only one citta
experiencing the object through the appropriate doorway, but a series
or process of cittas. A rūpa which impinges on one of the senses is
experienced by a process of cittas. When that sense-door process is
over, the object is experienced by cittas arising in a mind-door
process. Cittas in sense-door processes and in mind-door processes
arise and fall away continuously. 

We may not know that both in a sense-door process and in a mind-door
process there are akusala cittas or kusala cittas arising. Because of
our accumulated ignorance we do not clearly know our different cittas
and we do not recognize our more subtle defilements.

In a sense-door process the object is experienced first by cittas which
are not kusala cittas or akusala cittas; it is experienced by
kiriyacittas and by vipākacittas. The five-door-adverting-consciousness
(pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta) is an ahetuka kiriyacitta (without beautiful
roots or unwholesome roots). It is succeeded by one of the
dvi-pañca-viññāṇas (the five pairs of seeing-consciousness,
hearing-consciousness, etc.) and this citta is ahetuka vipāka. Then
there are two more ahetuka vipākacittas: the sampaṭicchana-citta which
receives the object and the santīraṇa-citta which investigates the
object. The santīraṇa-citta is succeeded by the votthapana-citta
(determining-consciousness) which is an ahetuka kiriyacitta. The
votthapana-citta determines the object and is then succeeded by kusala
cittas or by akusala cittas. In the case of those who are arahats there
are no kusala cittas or akusala cittas succeeding the votthapana-citta
but kiriyacittas. When the cittas of the sense-door process have fallen
away, cittas of the mind-door process experience the object. First
there are bhavanga-cittas and then the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta arises
which has the function of adverting to the object through the
mind-door. The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is succeeded by kusala cittas or
by akusala cittas in the case of those who are not arahats. The
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is not kusala or akusala, it is ahetuka
kiriyacitta. 

Since cittas arise and fall away very rapidly it is hard to know the
different cittas which arise. Often we may not even know when we have
kusala cittas or akusala cittas. For example, after there has been
seeing we may not realize when there is attachment to the object, when
there is aversion towards it, or when there is ignorance of realities.
If we study the Dhamma we will learn about our cittas in detail and we
will also come to know our more subtle defilements. Ignorance of our
akusala cittas is dangerous. If we do not know when we have akusala
cittas we will continue to accumulate akusala.

The kusala cittas and akusala cittas which arise perform a function;
they perform the function of @dfn{javana} or
``running through the
object'' @footnote{Javana is
sometimes translated as “impulsion” or as “apperception”.}. In the
sense-door process the votthapana-citta has determined the object
already when the javana-cittas arise. Thus, the kusala cittas or
akusala cittas which follow have as their only function to
``run
through'' the object. There is not
just one moment of citta which performs the function of javana, but
usually there are seven cittas in succession which perform this
function @footnote{In the “Book of Conditional Relations” it has been
explained under “repetition condition” that kusala khandhas are
followed by kusala khandhas and akusala khandhas by akusala khandhas.
The commentaries, the Visuddhimagga ( XIV, 121) and the Atthasālinī
(II, Book I, Part X, chapter II, 270) state that  there are six or
seven moments of javana. The number of seven is not expressively stated
in the scriptures, but when we consider the number of cittas in the
mind-door process during which enlightenment is attained, as we
will see in chapter 24, we have an indication that the number of
javana-cittas as given by the commentaries is based on canonical
tradition. In different parts of the scriptures the javana-cittas of
this process are denoted by particular names and in this way we can
know the number of these cittas.}. As we have seen (in chapter 12) one
material unit, a sense-object which is experienced by cittas in a
process, equals sixteen or seventeen mental units. Such numbers should
be seen as a comparative notion. Within a process of cittas the
duration of javana occupies seven moments. Since cittas arise and fall
away extremely rapidly we cannot count these seven moments, it all
takes place in a flash.

The javana-cittas arising in one process are a sequence of seven cittas
of the same type. If the first javana-citta is kusala, the succeeding
six cittas are also kusala cittas; if the first javana-citta is
akusala, the succeeding six cittas are also akusala cittas. Do we know
when the javana-cittas are akusala cittas rooted in lobha, dosa or
moha, or when they are kusala cittas? We are ignorant most of the time,
even of javana-cittas. 

There are fifty-five kinds of citta which can perform the function of
javana. There are twelve akusala cittas performing the function of
javana, namely: eight lobha-mūla-cittas, two dosa-mūla-cittas and two
moha-mūla-cittas @footnote{See Ch 4, 6 and 7.}.

There are eight kāmāvara kusala cittas @footnote{Kāmāavacara cittas are
cittas of the sensuous plane of consciousness, not jhānacittas or
lokuttara cittas. Details will be given in Ch 19.}, which are called
mahā-kusala cittas, performing the function of javana.

There are eight mahā-kiriyacittas of the arahat (kiriyacittas,
``inoperative
cittas'', which are not ahetuka, but
accompanied by sobhana hetus) performing the function of javana. The
arahat has mahā-kiriyacittas instead of mahā-kusala cittas since he
does not accumulate any more kamma. Mahā-kiriyacittas are of the
sensuous plane of consciousness; they are not jhānacittas or lokuttara
cittas.

Arahats also have kāmāvacara cittas; they see, hear or think of objects
experienced through the senses. However, there are no kusala cittas or
akusala cittas arising on account of what is experienced. 

For the arahat there is also an ahetuka kiriyacitta performing the
function of javana, which may arise when he smiles: the
hasituppāda-citta or the smile-producing consciousness. 

Those who attain rūpa-jhāna (fine-material jhāna) can have five types of
rūpāvacara kusala cittas performing the function of javana, since there
are five stages of rūpa-jhāna. Arahats who attain rūpa-jhāna can have
five types of rūpāvacara kiriyacittas which perform the function of
javana.

For those who attain arūpa-jhāna (immaterial jhāna) there can be four
types of arūpāvacara kusala cittas performing the function of javana,
since there are four stages of arūpa-jhāna. Arahats who attain
arūpa-jhāna can have four types of arūpāvacara kiriyacittas performing
the function of javana. 

Those who directly experience nibbāna have lokuttara cittas. There are
four stages of enlightenment and at each of these stages lokuttara
kusala citta or magga-citta (“path-consciousness; “magga” means path)
and lokuttara vipākacitta or phala-citta (“fruit-consciousness”; “phala”
means fruit) arise. Thus there are for the four stages of enlightenment
four pairs of lokuttara cittas: four magga-cittas and four phala-cittas
@footnote{Lokuttara cittas will be explained in chapter 23 and 24.}.
Lokuttara magga-citta produces result immediately, in the same process
of cittas. The phala-citta citta succeeds the magga-citta in the same
process. Kusala kamma that is not lokuttara, supramundane, does not
produce vipāka in the same process but it does so later on. The
magga-citta performs the function of javana,
``running through the
object'' which is nibbāna, and the
phala-cittas also perform the function of javana. The vipākacittas
other than the lokuttara vipākacitta do not perform the function of
javana. Thus, all eight lokuttara cittas perform the function of
javana. 

There are fifty-five cittas in all which perform the function of javana.
Summarising them, they are:

@itemize

@item
 8 lobha-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in attachment)

@item
 2 dosa-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in aversion)

@item
 2 moha-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in ignorance) 

@sp 1

@item
 8 mahā-kusala cittas (kāmāvacara kusala cittas)

@item
 8 mahā-kiriyacittas

@item
 1 hasituppāda-citta (ahetuka kiriyacitta of the arahat which may arise when he smiles)

@item
 5 rūpāvacara kusala cittas (rūpa-jhānacittas)

@item
 5 rūpāvacara kiriyacittas (rūpa-jhānacittas of the arahat)

@item
 4 arūpāvacara kusala cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas)

@item
4 arūpāvacara kiriyacittas (arūpa-jhānacittas of the arahat)

@item
4 magga-cittas (lokuttara kusala cittas) 

@item
4 phala-cittas (lokuttara vipākacittas) 

@end itemize

It is useful to know that when akusala cittas arise on account of an
object, not merely one akusala citta, but seven akusala cittas arise in
one process and this process of cittas can be followed by other
processes with akusala javana-cittas. Each time we dislike something
there are processes of cittas which experience the object, and in each
of these processes there are seven akusala javana-cittas. Countless
akusala cittas may arise on account of something we dislike or are
attached to.

There is no self who can prevent akusala cittas from arising; as soon as
the votthapana-citta in the sense-door process has determined the
object, this citta is succeeded by akusala cittas already, and as soon
as the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta has adverted to the object in the
mind-door process, this citta is succeeded by akusala cittas already.
The cittas which arise in processes do so in a fixed order. When the
first javana-citta has arisen it has to be succeeded by the following
javana-cittas. The first javana-citta conditions the second one and
this again the following one; each subsequent javana-citta is
conditioned by the preceding one. 

Processes with kusala javana-cittas and processes with akusala
javana-cittas can arise shortly one after the other. For instance,
people have the intention to offer food to the monks. However, when
someone has bought the ingredients for the food he is going to offer,
he may find the cost rather high. At that moment there may be cittas
with stinginess and then the javana-cittas are akusala cittas. Thus we
see that accumulated defilements can appear at any time when there are
conditions, even if one has the intention to do a good deed.

It is during the time of the javana-cittas that we accumulate
wholesomeness or unwholesomeness. There is no self who can control
javana-cittas, but knowing the conditions for wholesomeness will help
us to have kusala cittas.

The Buddha, out of compassion, taught people the way to have less
akusala. He encouraged them to perform all kinds of kusala, no matter
whether it is dāna (generosity), sīla (morality) or bhāvanā (mental
development). He taught the development of the wisdom which can
eradicate all kinds of akusala. There are different degrees of wisdom,
paññā. If there is understanding of what is kusala and what is akusala,
there is paññā, but it is not of the degree that it can eradicate
akusala. When paññā has been developed to the degree of
“insight-wisdom”, it will become clearer that there is no self who
develops wholesomeness and abstains from ill deeds. However, only the
paññā of the sotāpanna has eradicated the wrong view of self. So long
as there is the concept of self, defilements cannot be eradicated.

The person who is not an ariyan (noble person who has attained
enlightenment) may be able to observe the five precepts, but there is a
difference between him and the sotāpanna, the ariyan who has attained
the first stage of enlightenment, who does not transgress them. The
non-ariyan may transgress the five precepts when there are conditions
for it, whereas for the sotāpanna there are no more conditions for
transgressing them. Moreover, the sotāpanna who observes sīla does not
take the observing of sīla for self any more, since he has eradicated
the latent tendency of wrong view. Thus his sīla is purer. He is on the
way leading to the eradication of all defilements. 

When we are not mindful of realities, we take the objects we experience
for
``self''.
When paññā realizes the objects which are experienced as nāma and rūpa,
elements which do not last and which are devoid of self, there is less
opportunity for akusala javana-cittas. 

In the Visuddhimagga (I, 55) we read about the
``Elder''
Mahā-Tissa:

@quotation
@dots{}It seems that as the Elder was on his way from Cetiyapabbata to
Anurādhapura for alms, a certain daughter-in-law of a clan, who had
quarrelled with her husband and had set out early from Anurādhapura all
dressed up and tricked out like a celestial nymph to go to her
relatives' home, saw him on the road, and being
low-minded, she laughed a loud laugh. (Wondering)
``What is
that?'', the Elder looked up, and
finding in the bones of her teeth the perception of foulness, he
reached Arahatship. Hence it was said:

@end quotation

@example

``He saw the bones that were her teeth,
And kept in mind his first perception;
And standing on that very spot,
The Elder became an Arahat.''

But her husband who was going after her saw the Elder 
and asked ``Venerable sir, did you by any chance
see a woman?'' The Elder told him:

``Whether it was a man or woman
That went by I noticed not; 
But only that on this high road
There goes a group of bones.''

@end example

Mahā-Tissa was not absorbed in the object he experienced, nor entranced
by the details. He realized when he perceived the
woman's teeth the
``foulness of the
body'' and he did not take what he
perceived for
``self''.
The perception of the ``foulness of the
body'' can remind us not to see the
self in the body, but to realize bodily phenomena as rūpas which do not
stay. Mahā-Tissa saw things as they are; the paññā arising at that
moment was to the degree that it could eradicate all defilements.

There are countless javana-cittas in a day with lobha, dosa and moha,
and therefore we should not be heedless. We read in the Kindred Sayings
(IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Second Fifty, chapter
V, paragraph  97, Dwelling heedless) : 

@quotation

At Sāvatthī was the occasion (of this discourse)@enddots{}

``I will teach you, monks, of the one
who dwells heedless, and of the one who dwells earnest. Do you listen
to it. 

And how, monks, does one dwell heedless?

In him, monks, who dwells with the faculty of sight uncontrolled, the
heart is corrupted by objects cognizable by the eye. In him whose heart
is corrupted there is no delight. Without delight there is no joy.
Where joy is not, there is no calm. Without calm one dwells in sorrow.
The sorrowful man's heart is not composed. When the
heart is not composed, one has not clear ideas. Through not having
clear ideas he is reckoned as one who dwells heedless.

(And it is the same with regard to the faculties of taste, touch and
mind.)

And how, monks, does one dwell earnest? 

In him, monks, who dwells with the faculty of sight controlled the heart
is not corrupted by objects cognizable by the eye. In him whose heart
is not corrupted delight is born. In one delighted joy is born. When
one is joyful the body is calmed. He whose body is calmed feels at
ease. Composed is the heart of him who is at ease. When the heart is
composed one's ideas are clear. Through having clear
ideas one is reckoned as one who dwells earnest.

(And it is the same with regard to the faculty of taste, touch and mind)

Thus, monks, is one a dweller in
earnestness.''

@end quotation

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Are there for the arahat only lokuttara cittas  performing the
function of javana, or can he also have kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the sense
sphere) performing the function of javana?

@item
Are there vipākacittas which can perform the function of javana?

@end enumerate   

@node The Functions of Tadārammaṇa and Cuti
@chapter The Functions of Tadārammaṇa and Cuti

An object which impinges on one of the senses can be visible object,
sound, odour, flavour or tangible object. Each of these objects is
rūpa. They arise and fall away, but they do not fall away as rapidly as
nāma. As we have seen (in chapter 12), rūpa lasts as long as seventeen
moments of citta. When a sense object which is rūpa impinges on one of
the senses, a process of cittas occurs which arise in a particular
order and perform each their own function while they experience that
sense object. The first citta of that process, the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta, five-door-adverting-consciousness, does not
arise immediately. First there have to be bhavanga-cittas and these
are: atīta-bhavanga, past bhavanga, bhavanga-calana, vibrating
bhavanga, and bhavangupaccheda, arrest-bhavanga or last bhavanga before
the current of bhavanga-cittas is arrested. These bhavanga-cittas do
not experience the rūpa which impinges on one of the senses. The
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta, which is a kiriyacitta, adverts to the object
and is then succeeded by one of the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas
(seeing-consciousness, hearing-consciousness, etc.) which is vipāka,
the result of a good deed or a bad deed. There is, however, not only
one moment of vipāka in a process, but several moments. The
pañca-viññāṇa (sense-cognition) is succeeded by sampaṭicchana-citta
(receiving-consciousness) which is vipāka and this citta is succeeded
by santīraṇa-citta (investigating-consciousness) which is also vipāka.
The santīraṇa-citta is succeeded by the votthapana-citta
(determining-consciousness) which is kiriyacitta. This citta is
succeeded by seven javana-cittas @footnote{See chapter 14.} which are,
in the case of non-arahats, akusala cittas or kusala cittas. All
cittas, starting with the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta, experience the
object which impinges on one of the senses. Counting from the
atīta-bhavanga, fifteen moments of citta have elapsed when the seventh
javana-citta has fallen away. If the rūpa which has impinged on one of
the senses and atīta-bhavanga arose at the same time, that rūpa can
survive two more moments of citta, since the duration of rūpa equals
seventeen moments of citta. Thus, after the javana-cittas there can be
two more moments of citta which directly experience the object. These
cittas, which are vipākacittas, are tadārammaṇa-cittas or
tadālambana-cittas. They perform the function of @dfn{tadārammaṇa} or
tadālambana, which is translated as
``registering''
or
``retention''.
Tadārammaṇa literally means ``that
object''; the citta
``hangs
on'' to that object. When the
tadārammaṇa-cittas have fallen away the sense-door process has run its
full course. There is, however, not always a complete sense-door
process. When a rūpa which impinges on one of the senses, more than
three moments of bhavanga-cittas may pass before a process starts and
then the process cannot run its full course. Since rūpa does not last
longer than seventeen moments of citta, it falls away before the
tadārammaṇa-cittas could arise. Thus, in that case there are no
tadārammaṇa-cittas @footnote{The “Abhidhammattha Sangaha”, Ch 4,
Analysis of Thought Processes, calls sense objects “very great” when
the process runs its full course; it calls them “great” when the
process is interrupted after the javana-cittas; it calls them “slight”
when the process is interrupted after the votthapana-citta; it calls
them very slight when the process does not start.}.

Only in the sensuous plane of existence kamma can, after kāmāvacara
javana-cittas (of the sense-sphere), produce the vipākacittas which are
the tadārammaṇa-cittas, ``hanging
on'' to the sense object
@footnote{See Visuddhimagga XIV, 122.}. For those who are born in
rūpa-brahma-planes where there are less conditions for
sense-impressions, and for those who are born in arūpa-brahma planes
where there are no sense-impressions, there are no tadārammaṇa-cittas
@footnote{Birth in a rūpa-brahma plane is the result of rūpāvacara
kusala citta (rūpa-jhānacitta) and birth in an arūpa-brahma-plane is
the result of arūpāvacara kusala citta (arūpa-jhānacitta). Those who
develop jhānacitta see the disadvantage of sense impressions, they want
to be freed from them.}. 

Summarising the cittas which succeed one another when a rūpa impinges on
one of the senses and becomes the object of cittas of a sense-door
process which runs its full course:

@enumerate

@item
Atīta-bhavanga (past bhavanga)

@item
Bhavanga-calana (vibrating bhavanga)

@item
Bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga)

@item
Pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (five-door-adverting-consciousness)

@item
Dvi-pañca-viññāṇa (the five pairs of seeing-consciousness, etc.)

@item
Sampaṭicchana-citta (receiving-consciousness)

@item
Santīraṇa-citta (investigating-consciousness)

@item
Votthapana-citta (determining-consciousness)

@item
Javana-cittas 

@item
ditto    kusala cittas or akusala cittas

@item
ditto    (in the case of non-arahats)

@item
ditto    “running through the object”

@item
ditto  

@item
ditto  

@item
ditto  

@item
Tadārammaṇa-citta (registering-consciousness)

@item
ditto

@end enumerate

The tadārammaṇa-citta experiences an object not only through the five
sense-doors but also through the mind-door. In the sense-door process
tadārammaṇa-citta can arise only when the object has not fallen away
yet. If tadārammaṇa-cittas arise in a sense-door process they can also
arise in the succeeding mind-door process. The tadārammaṇa-citta is a
vipākacitta which can experience an object through six doors. For
example, when visible object contacts the eyesense and the process runs
its full course, the tadārammaṇa-cittas arising in that process
experience the object through the eye-door. The tadārammaṇa-cittas of
the mind-door process which succeeds the eye-door process experience
that object through the mind-door @footnote{The “Abhidhammattha
Sangaha”, in Ch 4, Analysis of Thought Processes, calls the object,
experienced through the mind-door, when the process runs its full
course, a “clear object”. If the mind-door process is interrupted after
the javana-cittas, the object is called “obscure”.}. When the object
which contacts the sense-door is unpleasant, all the vipākacittas in
that process and thus also the tadārammaṇa-cittas, if they arise, are
akusala vipāka. The tadārammaṇa-cittas of the succeeding mind-door
process are also akusala vipāka. When the object which contacts the
sense-door is pleasant, all vipākacittas of that process, including the
tadārammaṇa-cittas, are kusala vipāka. It is the same with the
tadārammaṇa-cittas of the subsequent mind-door process.

The function of tadārammaṇa can be performed by eleven different types
of vipākacitta: by three ahetuka vipākacittas (unaccompanied by hetus,
roots) and by eight sahetuka vipākacittas (accompanied by sobhana
hetus, beautiful roots). 

If the tadārammaṇa-citta is ahetuka, the function of tadārammaṇa is
performed by the ahetuka vipākacitta which is classified as
santīraṇa-citta. As we have seen (in chapter 9), there are three kinds
of santīraṇa-citta: one type is akusala vipāka accompanied by upekkhā
(indifferent feeling), one type is kusala vipāka, accompanied by
upekkhā, and one type is kusala vipāka, accompanied by somanassa
(pleasant feeling). As stated before (in chapter 11), santīraṇa-citta
can perform more than one function at different occasions.
Santīraṇa-citta performs the function of santīraṇa (investigating the
object) when it arises in a sense-door process and succeeds
sampaṭicchana-citta. Apart from the function of investigating the
object, santīraṇa-citta can also perform the functions of paṭisandhi
(rebirth), bhavanga and cuti (dying). In those cases santīraṇa-citta
does not arise within a process of cittas. Moreover, santīraṇa-citta
can perform the function of tadārammaṇa. Apart from the three ahetuka
vipākacittas which can perform the function of tadārammaṇa, there are
eight sahetuka vipākacittas or mahā-vipākacittas which can perform the
function of tadārammaṇa.

All the time cittas arise and fall away, performing different functions.
The last function of citta in life is the function of @dfn{cuti} (dying).
When we say in conventional language that a person has died, the
cuti-citta (dying-consciousness), which is the last citta of that life,
has fallen away. The cuti-citta is succeeded by the paṭisandhi-citta
(rebirth-consciousness) of the following life.

Death is unavoidable. Everybody, no matter whether he is in one of the
unhappy planes, in the human plane or in one of the heavenly planes,
has to have cuti-citta. We read in the teachings about birth, old age,
sickness and death. Old age is mentioned immediately after birth,
before sickness is mentioned. The reason is that as soon as we are
born, we are already ageing, we are already on our way to death. We
read in the Sutta-Nipāta (The Group of Discourses, chapter III, paragraph 8, The
Barb, vs. 574-587, Khuddaka Nikāya): 

@quotation

The life of mortals here cannot be predicted by any sign, and (its
duration) is uncertain. (It is) difficult and brief, and it is combined
with misery.

For there is no means whereby those born do not die. Even (for one)
arriving at old age there is death, for of such a nature are living
creatures. 

Just as for ripe fruit there is constantly fear of falling, so for
mortals who are born there is constantly fear of death. 

Just as vessels made of clay by a potter all have breaking as their end,
so is the life of mortals.

Young and old, those who are foolish and those who are wise, all go into
the power of death, all have death as their end. 

When they are overcome by death, going from here to the next world, the
father does not protect the son, nor the relatives the (other)
relatives.

See, while the relatives are actually looking on, (and) wailing much,
each one of the mortals is led away like a cow to be slaughtered.

Thus the world is smitten by death and old age. Therefore wise men do
not grieve, knowing the way of the world. 

Whose path you do not know, whether come or gone, not seeing both ends
you lament (him) uselessly.

If lamenting (and) harming himself a deluded person should pluck out any
advantage (from his action), a wise man would do that too.

For not by weeping and grief does one obtain peace of mind. His misery
arises all the more, his body is harmed.

He becomes thin and discoloured, harming himself by himself. The
departed ones do not fare well thereby. Lamentation is useless.

Not abandoning grief a person goes all the more to misery. Bewailing the
dead man he goes under the influence of grief@enddots{}

@end quotation

If one is not wise, one grieves, but for those who develop the eightfold
Path, there will be less sorrow. For him who has attained the stage of
the arahat, there will be cuti-citta, but it will not be succeeded by
paṭisandhi-citta. Then the end to birth, old age, sickness and death
has been reached.

We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Threes, chapter VII, paragraph 62,
Terror, V and VI):

@quotation

Monks, these three terrors part mother and son. What three? 

A mother cannot bear to see her son grow old. She says,
``I am growing old. Let not my son grow
old.'' The son likewise cannot bear
to see his mother grow old. He says,
``I am growing old. Let not my mother
grow old.'' And it is the same with
regard to getting sick and dying. These are the three terrors that part
mother and son.

But, monks, there is a way, there is a practice that leads to the
abandoning, to the overpassing of these three terrors that part mother
and son, a way which joins mother and son. What is that way, what is
that practice which so leads?

It is just this Eightfold Way, to wit: Right view, right thinking, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, right concentration. That is the way, that is the
practice@enddots{}

@end quotation

The eightfold Path eventually leads to the end of birth, old age,
sickness and death. If one is not an arahat, there will be a
paṭisandhi-citta succeeding the cuti-citta. Before the cuti-citta
arises, there are only five javana-cittas instead of seven, because the
javana process is weaker due to the nearness of death (Vis. chapter
XVII, 143). These are the last javana-cittas of that lifespan. If
akusala kamma produces the rebirth of the next life there will be an
unhappy rebirth. In that case the last javana-cittas are akusala cittas
and they experience an unpleasant object. If kusala kamma produces the
rebirth there will be a happy rebirth. In that case the last
javana-cittas are kusala cittas and they experience a pleasant object
@footnote{See chapter 10.}. These javana-cittas experience an object
through one of the sense-doors or through the mind-door. The object
that presents itself to the dying person may be the past kamma that
will condition his rebirth, a sign of past kamma, a sign of his future
destiny or any object that is experienced through one of the senses
(Vis. XVII, 136-146). The tadārammaṇa-citta which has as function to
register the object may or may not follow. Then the cuti-citta arises,
the last citta of this present life. The cuti-citta is succeeded by the
paṭisandhi-citta of the following life and this citta experiences the
same object as the last javana-cittas arising before the cuti-citta of
the previous life. Whatever that object may have been, the
paṭisandhi-citta of the new life and also all bhavanga-cittas arising
in the course of that new life and finally the cuti-citta of that life
experience that object. There is sometimes a misunderstanding that the
cuti-citta of the previous life determines one's
rebirth, but this is not so. The only function of the cuti-citta is
being the last moment of a lifespan. The cuti-citta is vipākacitta
produced by the kamma which produced the paṭisandhi-citta and the
bhavanga-cittas of the life which is just ending; it is of the same
type as these cittas and it experiences the same object. Past kusala
kamma or akusala kamma which will produce one's
rebirth conditions the last javana-cittas to experience a pleasant
object or an unpleasant object. 

The paṭisandhi-citta, the bhavanga-cittas and the cuti-citta in one
lifespan are the same type of vipākacitta and they experience the same
object. There are nineteen types of citta which can perform the
function of paṭisandhi @footnote{See chapter 11.} and the function of
bhavanga, and these same nineteen types of citta can perform the
function of cuti. 

If someone suffers great pains before he dies because of an accident or
sickness, the last javana-cittas arising before the cuti-citta will not
necessarily be akusala cittas. There may be akusala cittas with
aversion when he feels the pain, but the last javana-cittas may be
kusala cittas, depending on the kamma which will produce his next
birth. 

We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Sixes, chapter VI, paragraph 2,
Phagguna) that the Buddha visited the venerable Phagguna who was very
ill. Phagguna had attained the second stage of enlightenment (the stage
of the sakadāgāmī, once-returner); he was not yet completely freed from
the ``five lower
fetters''. We read in the sutta that
the Buddha said to Phagguna:

@quotation

``I hope, Phagguna,
you're bearing up, keeping going; that your aches and
pains grow less, not more; that there are signs of their growing less,
not more?''

``Lord, I can neither bear up nor keep
going; my aches and pains grow grievously more, not less; and there are
signs of their growing more, not less.

Lord, the violent ache that racks my head is just as though some lusty
fellow chopped at it with a sharp-edged sword; lord, I can neither bear
up nor keep going; my pains grow more, not
less@enddots{}''

So the Exalted One instructed him, roused him, gladdened him and
comforted him with Dhamma-talk, then rose from his seat and departed.

Now not long after the Exalted One's departure, the
venerable Phagguna died; and at the time of his death his faculties
were completely purified.

Then went the venerable Ānanda to the Exalted One, saluted him, and sat
down at one side. So seated, he said:

``Lord, not long after the Exalted One
left, the venerable Phagguna died; and at that time his faculties were
completely purified.''

``But why, Ānanda, should not the
faculties of the monk Phagguna have been completely purified? The
monk's mind, Ānanda, had not been wholly freed from
the five lower fetters; but, when he heard that Dhamma teaching, his
mind was wholly freed.

There are these six advantages, Ānanda, in hearing Dhamma in time, in
testing its goodness in time. What six?

Consider, Ānanda, the monk whose mind is not wholly freed from the five
lower fetters, but, when dying, is able to see the Tathāgata: the
Tathāgata teaches him Dhamma, lovely in the beginning, lovely in the
middle, lovely in the end, its goodness, its significance; and makes
known the brahman-life @footnote{In Pāli: brahma-cariya: pure or holy
life. This term is not only used for the monk’s life, but also with
regard to all those who develop the eightfold Path which leads to the
eradication of all defilements.}, wholly fulfilled, perfectly pure.
When he has heard that Dhamma teaching, his mind is wholly freed from
the five lower fetters @footnote{Those who have attained the third
stage of enlightenment, the stage of the anāgāmī, non-returner, are
completely free from the five “lower fetters”.}. This, Ānanda, is the
first advantage in hearing Dhamma in time. 

Or@dots{}though not just able to see the Tathāgata, sees his disciple, who
teaches him Dhamma@dots{}and makes known the brahman-life@dots{}Then is his
mind wholly freed from the five lower fetters. This, Ānanda, is the
second advantage@enddots{}

Or@dots{}though not able to see the Tathāgata or his disciple, continues to
reflect in mind on Dhamma, as heard, as learnt, ponders on it, pores
over it. Then is his mind wholly freed from the five lower fetters.
This, Ānanda, is the third advantage in testing its goodness in
time@enddots{}''

@end quotation

The same is said with regard to the monk who has attained the third
stage of enlightenment (the stage of the anāgāmī), and who, after
hearing Dhamma in time and testing its goodness in time, can attain the
stage of the arahat.

Summary of functions (kicca) of citta: 

@enumerate

@item
Paṭisandhi (rebirth)

@item
Bhavanga (life-continuum)

@item
Āvajjana (adverting, through the sense-doors and through the mind-
door)

@item
Seeing

@item
Hearing

@item
Smelling

@item
Tasting

@item
Experiencing tangible object through the bodysense

@item
Sampaṭicchana (receiving)

@item
Santīraṇa (investigating)

@item
Votthapana (determining)

@item
Javana (impulsion, or ``running
through the object'')

@item
Tadārammaṇa (or tadālambana, registering)

@item
Cuti (dying)

@end enumerate

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Why can tadārammaṇa-citta not arise in the rūpa-brahma planes and in
the arūpa-brahma planes? 

@item
By how many types of citta can the function of cuti (dying) be
performed?

@end enumerate  

@node Objects and Doors
@chapter Objects and Doors

Citta knows or experiences something, it experiences an object. There
cannot be any citta without an object. When an object presents itself
through one of the five senses or through the mind-door, do we realize
that it is citta which experiences an object? So long as we do not see
things as they really are, we think that a self experiences objects,
and, moreover, we take objects for permanent and for self. For example,
when we see a log of wood, we are used to thinking that the object
which is seen at that moment is a log of wood; we do not realize that
only visible object is the object which can be seen. When we touch the
log of wood, hardness or cold, for example, can be experienced through
the bodysense. We take the log of wood for a thing which lasts, but
what we call ``log of
wood'' are many different rūpas which
arise and fall away. Only one characteristic of rūpa can be experienced
at a time, when it presents itself. If we develop understanding of the
different characteristics which appear through different doorways we
will be able to see things as they really are.

The ariyan sees life in a way which is different from the way the
non-ariyan sees it. What the non-ariyan takes for happiness (in Pāli:
sukha), is for the ariyan sorrow (dukkha); what for the non-ariyan is
sorrow, is for the ariyan happiness. In the Kindred Sayings (IV,
Saḷāyatana-vagga, Third Fifty, chapter IV, paragraph 136) it is said in verse:

@example

Things seen and heard, tastes, odours, what we touch,
Perceive@minus{}all, everything desirable,
Pleasant and sweet, while one can say ``it is'',
These are deemed ``sukha'' by both gods and men.
And when they cease to be they hold it woe.
The dissolution of the body-self
To ariyans seems ``sukha''. Everything 
The world holds good, sages see otherwise.

What other men call ``sukha'', that the saints
Call ``dukkha''; what the rest so name,
That do the ariyans know as happiness.
Behold a Dhamma that's hard to apprehend.
Hereby are baffled they that are not wise.
Darkness is theirs, enmeshed by ignorance:
Blindness is theirs, who cannot see the light@enddots{}

@end example

The Buddha taught about objects, experienced by cittas through different
doors, in order to cure people of their blindness. When we study the
teachings we learn that there are six classes of objects (in Pāli:
ārammaṇa), which can be known by citta. 

@enumerate

@item
The first class is: visible object or rūpārammaṇa. The object which is
experienced through the eye-door can only be the kind of rūpa which is
visible object. We can call it visible object or colour, it does not
matter how we name it; but we should know that it is just that which is
visible, that which appears through the eyes. Visible object is not a
thing or a person we may think of. When we think that we see a tree,
animal or man, we think of concepts and such moments are different from
seeing, the experience of what is visible. 

@item
The second class of ārammaṇa, is sound (saddārammaṇa).

@item
The third class is smell (gandhārammaṇa).

@item
The fourth class is taste (rasārammaṇa).

@item
The fifth class is tangible object, experienced through the bodysense
(phoṭṭhabbārammaṇa). Tangible object comprises the following rūpas:

@itemize

@item
the Element of Earth @footnote{Here earth, water, fire and wind do not
denote conventional ideas; in Buddhism they are names for
characteristics of realities.} (in Pāli: paṭhavi-dhātu) or solidity,
which can be experienced as hardness or softness

@item
the Element of Fire (in Pāli: tejo-dhātu) or temperature, which can be
experienced as heat or cold

@item
the Element of Wind (in Pāli: vāyo-dhātu) or motion, which can be
experienced as motion or pressure
@itemize @minus
@item
Solidity (earth), cohesion (water), temperature (fire) and motion (wind
or air) are the four principle rūpas (mahā-bhūta-rūpas). Rūpas arise in
groups or units of several kinds of rūpas and the four principle rūpas
always have to arise together with any other kind of rūpa, no matter
whether it is in the body or external. Cohesion or fluidity (the
Element of Water, in Pāli: apo-dhātu) cannot be experienced through the
bodysense. When we touch water the characteristics of hardness or
softness, heat or cold, motion or pressure can be directly experienced
through the bodysense. The characteristic of cohesion can be
experienced only through the mind-door; it is, as we will see, included
in the sixth class of ārammaṇa, the dhammārammaṇa. 
@end itemize
@end itemize

@item
Dhammārammaṇa comprises all objects other than those included in the
first five classes of objects, as will be explained later on.
Dhammārammaṇa can be experienced only through the mind-door. 

@end enumerate

If one has not developed
``insight'',
right understanding of realities, one does not clearly know which
object presents itself through which doorway, one is confused as to
objects and doors; thus, one is confused about the world. The ariyan is
not confused about the world; he knows the objects which appear through
the six doors as nāma and rūpa, not self.

The Discourse on the Six Sixes (Middle Length Sayings III, no. 148) is
very helpful for the understanding of realities which present
themselves through the six doors. When the Buddha was staying in the
Jeta Grove in Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery, he explained
to the monks about the six ``internal
sense-fields'' and the six
``external
sense-fields'' (in Pāli: āyatana).
The six ``internal
sensefields'' are the five senses and
the mind. The six ``external
sense-fields'' are the objects,
experienced through six doors. The Buddha explained about six classes
of consciousness (seeing, hearing, etc.) which arise in dependence on
six doors and on the objects experienced through these doors. He also
explained about six kinds of contact (phassa), six kinds of feeling
conditioned by the six kinds of contact, and six kinds of craving
conditioned by the six kinds of feeling. Thus there are
``Six
Sixes'', six groups of six realities.

The Buddha then explained about the person who has attachment, aversion
and ignorance with regard to what he experiences through the six doors.
We read:

@quotation

``Monks, visual consciousness arises
because of eye and visible object, the meeting of the three is sensory
impingement @footnote{Contact} ; an experience arises conditioned by
sensory impingement that is pleasant or painful or neither painful nor
pleasant. He, being impinged on by a pleasant feeling, delights,
rejoices and persists in cleaving to it; a tendency to attachment is
latent in him. Being impinged on by a painful feeling, he grieves,
mourns, laments, beats his breast and falls into disillusion; a
tendency to repugnance is latent in him. Being impinged on by a feeling
that is neither painful nor pleasant, he does not comprehend the origin
nor the going down nor the satisfaction nor the peril of that feeling
nor the escape from it as it really is; a tendency to ignorance is
latent in him@enddots{}''

@end quotation

The same is said with regard to the other doorways. We then read about
the person who has developed the wisdom which can eradicate attachment,
aversion and ignorance:

@quotation

``@dots{}He, being impinged on by pleasant
feeling, does not delight, rejoice or persist in cleaving to it; a
tendency to attachment is not latent in him. Being impinged on by a
painful feeling, he does not grieve, mourn, lament, beat his breast or
fall into disillusion; a tendency to repugnance is not latent in him.
Being impinged on by a feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant, he
comprehends the origin and the going down and the satisfaction and the
peril of that feeling and the escape as it really is, a tendency to
ignorance is not latent in him. That he, monks, by getting rid of any
tendency to attachment to a pleasant feeling, by driving out any
tendency to repugnance for a painful feeling, by rooting out any
tendency to ignorance concerning a feeling that is neither painful nor
pleasant, by getting rid of ignorance, by making knowledge arise,
should here and now be an end-maker of dukkha  @minus{} this situation exists.

Seeing this thus, monks, the instructed disciple of the ariyans turns
away from eye, turns away from material shapes, turns away from visual
consciousness, turns away from impact on the eye, turns away from
feeling, turns away from craving. He turns away from ear, he turns away
from sounds@dots{}He turns away from nose, he turns away from smells@dots{}He
turns away from tongue@dots{}he turns away from tastes@dots{}He turns away
from body, he turns away from touches@dots{}He turns away from mind, he
turns away from mental states, he turns away from mental consciousness,
he turns away from impact on the mind, he turns away from feeling, he
turns away from craving. Turning away he is dispassionate; by
dispassion he is freed; in freedom is the knowledge that he is freed,
and he comprehends: Destroyed is birth, brought to a close the
Brahma-faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of being
such or so.''

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, these monks rejoiced in what the Lord
had said. And while this exposition was being given the minds of as
many as sixty monks were freed from the cankers without grasping.

@end quotation

While the Buddha explained to the monks about the objects appearing
through the six doors, the monks were mindful of nāma and rūpa while
they listened; they developed right understanding and several among
them could even attain arahatship. 

As we have seen, dhammārammaṇa, the sixth class of objects, can be
experienced only through the mind-door. It includes all objects other
than the sense objects. Dhammārammaṇa can again be subdivided into six
classes. They are:

@enumerate

@item
The five sense-organs (pasāda-rūpas)

@item
The subtle rūpas (sukhuma-rūpas)

@item
Citta

@item
Cetasika

@item
Nibbāna

@item
Concepts and conventional terms (paññatti)

@end enumerate

The first class of dhammārammaṇa comprises the five sense-organs
(pasāda-rūpas); they are the rūpas which have the capacity to receive
sense-impressions. The pasāda-rūpas themselves do not experience
anything, they are rūpa, not nāma; they function as the doors through
which cittas experience objects. The pasāda-rūpas can only be known
through the mind-door, not through the sense-doors. For example, we
know that there is eyesense, because there is seeing, but we cannot
experience eyesense through the eyes. 

The five sense-organs are classified as gross (olārika) rūpas.
Altogether there are twenty-eight kinds of rūpa of which twelve are
classified as gross and sixteen as subtle (sukhuma). The gross rūpas
include, besides the five sense-organs, the sense objects which can be
experienced through the five sense-doors; these are seven rūpas, that
is to say: four rūpas which can respectively be experienced through the
four sense-doors of eyes, ears, nose and tongue, and the three rūpas of
solidity, temperature and motion which can be experienced through the
door of the bodysense. Thus, there are altogether twelve gross rūpas.
As we have seen, the sense objects have been classified separately,
they are not included in dhammārammaṇa. 

There are sixteen kinds of subtle rūpa and these have been classified as
the second class of dhammārammaṇa. They include, for example, nutritive
essence (ojā), bodily intimation, kāya-viññatti, the rūpa which is the
physical condition for expression through the body, such as gestures or
facial expression, and vocal intimation, vacīviññatti, the rūpa which
is the physical condition for speech or other ways of vocal intimation.

Citta is another class of dhammārammaṇa. Cittas experience different
objects, ārammaṇas, but citta itself can be ārammaṇa as well. Kusala
cittas, akusala cittas and many other types of citta can be the object
experienced by another citta.

The class of dhammārammaṇa which is cetasika comprises all fifty-two
cetasikas. Feeling is a cetasika. Painful feeling, for example, can be
known by citta; then the object of citta is dhammārammaṇa. When one
experiences hardness the object is not dhammārammaṇa but tangible
object (phoṭṭhabbārammaṇa), which is included in the fifth class of
objects. Hardness and painful feeling can appear closely one after the
other. If one does not realize that hardness and painful feeling are
different ārammaṇas and if one is ignorant of the different
characteristics of nāma and rūpa, one will continue taking them for
self.

Citta can experience all objects. Also nibbāna can be experienced by
citta. Nibbāna is dhammārammaṇa, it can only be experienced through the
mind-door. Thus, citta can experience both conditioned dhammas and the
unconditioned dhamma, which is nibbāna. The citta which experiences
conditioned dhammas is lokiya citta,
``mundane''
@footnote{This does not mean “worldly” as it is understood in
conventional language.}. The citta which, at the attainment of
enlightenment, directly experiences nibbāna is lokuttara citta,
``supramundane
citta''.

Another class of dhammārammaṇa is concepts(paññatti), that is to say,
both ideas and conventional terms . Thus we see that citta can know
both paramattha dhammas, absolute realities, and concepts which are not
real in the absolute sense. 

A concept or a conventional truth is not a paramattha dhamma. We can
think of a person, an animal or a thing because of remembrance of past
experiences, but these are not paramattha dhammas, realities which each
have their own unchangeable characteristic, no matter how one names
them. When there is thinking about a concept, it is nāma which thinks;
thinking is a paramattha dhamma but the concept which is the object of
thinking is not real in the absolute sense. 

Paññatti can mean a concept or idea which is not real in the absolute
sense as well as a conventional term. Conventional terms can denote
both realities and things which are not real. A term which in itself is
not a paramattha dhamma, can denote a paramattha dhamma. For instance,
the terms
``nāma''
and
``rūpa''
are paññatti, but they denote paramattha dhammas. It is essential to
know the difference between paramattha dhamma and paññatti. If we cling
to the terms
``nāma''
and
``rūpa''
and continue thinking about nāma and rūpa, instead of being aware of
their characteristics when they appear, we will know only paññattis
instead of realities. 

Summarising the objects which citta can experience: five classes of
objects which are rūpas, namely, visible object, sound, smell, taste
and tangible object ; the sixth class, dhammārammaṇa, which is again
subdivided into six classes, including: citta, cetasika, the rūpas
which are the five senses, subtle rūpas, nibbāna and also paññatti.

Different objects can be experienced through different doorways (in
Pāli: dvāra). For example, the eyesense, the pasāda-rūpa which has the
capacity to receive visible object, is a necessary condition for citta
to experience visible object. If there were no pasāda-rūpa in the eye,
citta could not experience visible object. This rūpa is the means, the
doorway, through which citta experiences visible object. 

Cittas arising in the sense-door processes know their objects through
the doors of the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue and the bodysense.
As regards the door of the bodysense, the pasāda-rūpa which has the
capacity to receive tangible object such as hardness, softness, heat,
cold, motion or pressure, is any part of the body where there is
sensitivity for such impressions. Thus, any part of the body can be
body-door, except those parts which have no sensitivity.

Five doors are rūpa and one door is nāma. The mind-door is nāma. The
cittas of the mind-door process experience an object through the
mind-door. Before the mind-door-adverting-consciousness,
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, arises, there are the bhavanga-calana
(vibrating bhavanga) and the bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga). The
bhavangupaccheda, the citta preceding the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, is
the mind-door. It is the
``doorway''
through which the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta and the succeeding cittas of
the mind-door process experience the object. It is useful to know
through which door cittas experience different objects. For example,
visible object, rūpārammaṇa, can be experienced both through the
eye-door and through the mind-door. It is experienced through the
eye-door when it has not fallen away yet. When it is experienced by the
cittas in the mind-door process following upon that eye-door process,
it has just fallen away. When visible object is experienced through the
mind-door the cittas only know visible object, they do not pay
attention to shape and form or think of a person or a thing. But time
and again there are also mind-door processes of cittas which think of
people or things and then the object is a concept, not visible object.
The experience of visible object conditions the thinking of concepts
which arises later on. 

In both the sense-door process and the mind-door process javana-cittas
arise @footnote{See chapter 14.}; these javana-cittas are, if one is
not an arahat, either kusala cittas or akusala cittas. When visible
object is experienced through the eye-door, one does not yet perceive a
person or a thing, but, already in the sense-door process, attachment
to what is seen can arise, or aversion towards it, or ignorance.
Defilements are deeply rooted, they can arise in the sense-door
processes and in the mind-door processes. We may think that the
enslavement to objects which are experienced through the different
doorways is caused by the objects. Defilements, however, are not caused
by objects, they are accumulated in the citta which experiences the
object.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Fourth Fifty,
chapter III, paragraph 191, Koṭṭhika) that Sāriputta and Mahā-Koṭṭhika were
staying near Vārānasi at Isipatana, in the Antelope Park. Koṭṭhika said
to Sāriputta:

@quotation

``How now, friend? Is the eye the bond
of objects, or are objects the bond of the eye? Is the tongue the bond
of savours, or are savours the bond of the tongue? Is mind the bond of
mind-objects @footnote{The Pāli text has dhammā, and the English text
has here “mind-states”.}, or are mind-objects the bond of the
mind?'' 

``Not so, friend Koṭṭhika. The eye is
not the bond of objects, nor are objects the bond of the eye, but that
desire and lust that arise owing to these two. That is the bond. And so
with the tongue and the mind@dots{}it is the desire and lust that arise
owing to savours and tongue, mind-objects and mind.

Suppose, friend, two oxen, one white and one black, tied by one rope or
one yoke-tie. Would one be right in saying that the black ox is the
bond for the white one, or that the white one is the bond for the black
one?''

``Surely not,
friend.''

``No, friend. It is not so. But the rope
or the yoke-tie which binds the two,  @minus{} that is the bond that unites
them. So it is with the eye and objects, with tongue and savours, with
mind and mind-objects. It is the desire and lust which arise owing to
them that form the bond that unites them. 

If the eye, friend, were the bond of objects, or if objects were the
bond of the eye, then this righteous life for the utter destruction of
dukkha could not be proclaimed. But since it is not so, but the desire
and lust which arise owing to them are the bond, therefore is the
righteous life for the utter destruction of dukkha proclaimed@enddots{}

There is in the Exalted One an eye, friend. The Exalted One sees an
object with the eye. But in the Exalted One is no desire and lust.
Wholly heart-free is the Exalted One. There is in the Exalted One a
tongue@dots{}a mind. But in the Exalted One is no desire and lust. Wholly
heart-free is the Exalted One. 

By this method, friend, you are to understand, as I said before, that
the bond is the desire and lust that arise owing to
things.''

@end quotation

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Through which doors can motion be experienced?

@item
Through which door can bodysense be experienced?

@item
What class of ārammaṇa (object) is cohesion?

@item
What class of ārammaṇa is lobha-mūla-citta (citta rooted in
attachment)?

@item
Through which door can lobha-mūla-citta be experienced? 

@item
Through which doors can lobha-mūla-citta experience an object?

@item
What class of ārammaṇa is cold?

@item
What class of ārammaṇa is painful bodily feeling?

@item
What class of ārammaṇa is unpleasant mental feeling?

@item
What class of ārammaṇa is paññā (wisdom)?

@item
Is the word ``peace'' an ārammaṇa? If so, what class?

@item
How many doors are rūpa and how many nāma?

@item
Can visible object be experienced through the mind-door? 

@item
Through how many doors does citta know dhammārammaṇa?

@item
How many classes of ārammaṇa are known through the mind-door?

@end enumerate

@node Doors and Physical Bases of Citta
@chapter Doors and Physical Bases of Citta

The Buddha pointed out the dangers of being infatuated with the objects
we experience through the six doors. He taught people to develop the
wisdom which knows the realities experienced through the six doors as
nāma and rūpa, phenomena which are impermanent and non-self. What is
impermanent is
``dukkha'',
it cannot be happiness. When we come to know things as they are, we
will be less infatuated with objects. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, Second Fifty, chapter III, paragraph 81, A brother) about the purpose of
the Buddha's teachings. The text states:

@quotation

Then a number of monks came to see the Exalted One@dots{}Seated at one side
those monks said to the Exalted One:  @minus{} 

``Now here, lord, the wandering
sectarians thus question us: `What is the objective,
friend, for which the holy life is lived under the rule of Gotama the
recluse?' Thus questioned, lord, we thus make answer
to those wandering sectarians: `It is for the full
knowledge of dukkha that the holy life is lived under the rule of the
Exalted One.' Pray, lord, when, thus questioned, we so
make answer, do we state the views of the Exalted One, without
misrepresenting the Exalted One by stating an untruth? Do we answer in
accordance with his teaching, so that no one who agrees with his
teaching and follows his views could incur
reproach?''

``Truly, monks, when thus questioned you
thus make answer, you do state my views@dots{}in stating that it is for
the full knowledge of dukkha that the holy life is lived under my rule.

But if, monks, the wandering sectarians should thus question you:
`But what, friend, is that dukkha, for the full
knowledge of which the holy life is lived under the rule of Gotama the
recluse?'  @minus{} thus questioned you should answer thus:
`The eye, friend is dukkha. For the full knowledge of
that the holy life is lived@dots{}Objects@dots{}that pleasant or unpleasant
or indifferent feeling that arises through eye-contact@dots{}the mind@enddots{}
that pleasant or unpleasant or indifferent feeling that arises through
mind-contact,   @minus{} that also is dukkha. Fully to know that, the holy
life is lived under the rule of the Exalted One.' Thus
questioned, monks, by those wandering sectarians, thus should you make
answer.''

@end quotation

In being aware of nāma and rūpa which appear, such as seeing, visible
object, feeling or thinking, we can prove to ourselves the truth of the
Buddha's teachings; we can prove that the objects
experienced through the six doors are impermanent and non-self. The
truth will not be known if one follows other people blindly or if one
speculates about the truth. We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV,
Saḷāyatana-vagga, Third Fifty, chapter V, paragraph 152, Is there a method?)
that the Buddha said:

@quotation

``Is there, monks, any method, by
following which a monk, apart from belief, apart from inclination,
apart from hearsay, apart from argument as to method, apart from
reflection on reasons, apart from delight in speculation, could affirm
insight thus: `Ended is birth, lived is the righteous
life, done is the task, for life in these conditions there is no
hereafter' ?''

``For us, lord, things have their root
in the Exalted One@dots{}Well indeed were it if the meaning of this that
has been spoken were to manifest itself in the Exalted One. Hearing it
from him the monks will remember
it.''

``There is indeed a method, monks, by
following which a monk@dots{}could affirm insight@dots{}And what is that
method?

Herein, monks, a monk, seeing an object with the eye, either recognizes
within him the existence of lust, aversion and ignorance, thus:
`I have lust, aversion and ignorance',
or recognizes the non-existence of these qualities within him, thus:
`I have not lust, aversion and
ignorance.' Now as to that recognition of their
existence or non-existence within him, are these conditions, I ask, to
be understood by belief, or by inclination, or hearsay, or argument as
to method, or reflection on reasons, or delight in
speculation?''

``Surely not,
lord.''

``Are these states to be understood by
seeing them with the eye of wisdom?''

``Surely,
lord.''

``Then, monks, this is the method by
following which, apart from belief@dots{}a monk could affirm insight thus:
`Ended is birth@dots{}for life in these conditions there
is no hereafter.' ``

@end quotation

The same is said with regard to the doors of the ear, the nose, the
tongue, the body and the mind.

When we study the Abhidhamma we should keep in mind the purpose of the
Buddha's teachings: the eradication of defilements
through the wisdom which realizes the phenomena appearing through the
six doors as they are. The development of this wisdom is the “method” 
leading to the end to the cycle of birth and death.

We should remember that the Abhidhamma is not a theoretical textbook but
an exposition of realities appearing in daily life. We learn about nāma
and rūpa; we learn about cittas which each have their own function in
the sense-door process and in the mind-door process. There are
sense-door processes and mind-door processes time and again, and
objects are experienced by cittas arising in these processes. If there
is awareness of characteristics of nāma and rūpa when they appear, the
paññā is developed which can eradicate defilements. This kind of wisdom
is deeper than any kind of theoretical knowledge.

Nāma and rūpa which arise and fall away are conditioned realities, they
arise because of different conditions. Through the study of the
Abhidhamma we learn about different conditions for nāma and rūpa. Each
reality which arises is dependent on several conditions. For instance,
seeing is vipāka, produced by kamma. Visible object conditions seeing
by being its object (ārammaṇa). If there is no visible object there
cannot be seeing. Eyesense, the kind of rūpa in the eye (pasāda-rūpa)
which is able to receive visible object, is another condition for
seeing.

The rūpa which is eyesense can function as the door (in Pāli: dvāra) for
seeing. A door or
``@dfn{dvāra}''
is the means through which citta experiences an object. There is
eyesense arising and falling away all the time; throughout our life it
is produced by kamma. However, eyesense is not a door all the time,
because there is not all the time the experience of visible object.
Eyesense is a door only when citta experiences visible object. It is
the same with the pasāda-rūpas which are the other sense-organs. They
are doors only when they are the means through which citta experiences
an object.

The eye-door is the means through which citta experiences visible
object. Not only the cittas which are eye-door-adverting-consciousness,
cakkhu-dvārāvajjana-citta, and seeing-consciousness, cakkhu-viññāṇa,
experience the object through the eye-door, the other cittas of that
process, which are receiving-consciousness, sampaṭicchana-citta,
investigating-consciousness, santīraṇa-citta,
determining-consciousness, votthapana-citta, the javana-cittas and the
tadārammaṇa-cittas (retention) are also dependent on the same door, in
order to experience the object. All the cittas of that process
experience the object through the eye-door while they each perform
their own function. After the rūpa which is experienced by these cittas
has fallen away, the object is experienced through the mind-door
(mano-dvāra).

Cittas arising in a process which experience an object through one of
the six doors are vīthi-cittas (vīthi means: way, course or process).
Vīthi-cittas are named after the door through which they experience an
object. For example, the cittas which experience an object through the
eye-door are called cakkhu-dvāra-vīthi-cittas (cakkhu-dvāra means
eye-door). The cittas which experience an object through the ear-door
(sota-dvāra) are called sota-dvāra-vīthi-cittas. The cittas which
experience an object through the mind-door (mano-dvāra) are called
mano-dvāra-vīthi-cittas. 

In between the different processes of citta there have to be
bhavanga-cittas (life-continuum). Bhavanga-cittas are not vīthi-cittas.
They are not part of the process of cittas experiencing objects which
time and again throughout our life impinge on the six doors. They
experience an object without being dependent on any doorway. As we have
seen (in chapter 15), the paṭisandhi-citta, rebirth-consciousness, the
bhavanga-cittas and the cuti-citta, dying consciousness, in one
lifespan experience the same object as the last javana-cittas which
arose before the cuti-citta of the previous life. The paṭisandhi-citta,
the bhavanga-citta and the cuti-citta are
``process-free
cittas'' (vīthi-mutta cittas), thus,
they are different from the cittas arising in sense-door processes and
mind-door processes. 

Some cittas perform their function only through one door. For example,
the two types of citta which are hearing-consciousness, sota-viññāṇa,
which can be kusala vipāka or akusala vipāka, only perform their
functions through one door, the ear-door. Some cittas can perform their
function through more than one door. Sampaṭicchana-citta,
receiving-consciousness, performs its function of receiving the object
through five doors, depending on the doorway which is contacted by the
object. Santīraṇa-citta, investigating-consciousness, performs
different functions through different doorways. It performs the
function of investigating the object through the five sense-doors, and
it can perform the function of tadārammaṇa (retention or registering,
occurring after the javana-cittas) through six doorways @footnote{See
chapter 15.}. It also performs functions without being dependent on any
doorway and this is the case when it performs the functions of
paṭisandhi, bhavanga and cuti @footnote{See chapter 11, 12 and 15.}. 

In the processes of citta the doorway (dvāra) is the means through which
citta experiences its object. The physical base or vatthu is another
factor which conditions citta by being its place of origin. In the
planes of existence where there are nāma and rūpa, cittas do not arise
independently of the body; a citta which arises has a rūpa as its place
of origin. Cittas such as seeing, hearing or thinking could not arise
without the body. Where does seeing arise? It needs the eye as its
physical base. The eyesense, cakkhuppasāda-rūpa, the rūpa in the eye
which can receive visible object, is the physical base for the citta
which sees. The physical base or vatthu is not the same as dvāra or
doorway. Although the five sense-organs can serve as dvāra and vatthu,
dvāra and vatthu have different functions. For example, the
cakkhuppasāda-rūpa functions as the eye-door (cakkhu-dvāra), the means
through which cittas of the eye-door process experience an object, and
also as the eye-base (cakkhu-vatthu), the physical base, the place of
origin for seeing-consciousness. This rūpa is the base only for
seeing-consciousness, not for the other cittas of that process. Thus,
one and the same rūpa, the eyesense, serves as both doorway and base
only for seeing-consciousness. Regarding the other cittas of the
eye-door process, they have the eyesense as doorway, but they have a
different base, as I shall explain later. It is the same in the case of
the other pañca-viññāṇas (sense-cognitions). The vatthu for
hearing-consciousness is the earsense (sotappasāda-rūpa), the vatthu
for smelling-consciousness the smelling-sense (ghānappasāda-rūpa), the
vatthu for tasting-consciousness the tasting-sense (jivhāppasāda-rūpa),
the vatthu for body-consciousness the bodysense (kāyappasāda-rūpa).The
bodysense can arise all over the body. Any part of the body which has
sensitivity can be vatthu for the kāya-viññāṇa. Thus, the five kinds of
pasāda-rūpa, the sense-organs, are the vatthus of the pañca-viññāṇas. 

There is a sixth vatthu which is not one of the pasāda-rūpas, sense-
organs. This is the rūpa which is the material support, the physical
base for all cittas other than the pañca-viññāṇas, the sense-cognitions
of seeing, hearing, etc. This rūpa is called in the commentaries the
heart-base or hadaya-vatthu @footnote{The name “heart-base” cannot be
found in the scriptures. The “Book of Conditional Relations”, the
seventh book of the Abhidhamma, refers, under “support condition”
(nissaya paccaya), to the heart-base as “that rūpa” which is the
material support for the “mind-element” and the “mind-consciousness
element”. These “elements” are the cittas other than the
pañca-viññāṇas.}. We should know its function, but there is no need to
specify its exact location. The hadaya-vatthu, heart-base, is different
from the mind-door. The mind-door is a citta, the bhavangupaccheda
(arrest-bhavanga) which is the last bhavanga-citta arising before the
mind-door-adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārāvajjana-citta). The
hadaya-vatthu is rūpa, not nāma. 

When sound contacts the ear-sense, the five-door-adverting-consciousness
(pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta) which arises has as its place of origin the
hadaya-vatthu, but the hearing-consciousness has the earsense, the
sotappasāda-rūpa, as its vatthu. All succeeding cittas of that process,
however, have the hadaya-vatthu as their place of origin. All cittas of
the mind-door process too have the hadaya-vatthu as their place of
origin.

The paṭisandhi-citta, the bhavanga-citta and the cuti-citta are, as we
have seen, ``process-free
cittas'' (vīthi-mutta cittas), cittas
which do not arise within a process and which experience an object
without dependence on any door. The
``process-free
cittas'' also need, in the planes
where there are both nāma and rūpa, a vatthu, a physical base. A new
life begins when the paṭisandhi-citta arises; however, there is not
only nāma, there has to be rūpa as well. The hadaya-vatthu is the rūpa
which is the vatthu of the paṭisandhi-citta. Also all bhavanga-cittas
and the cuti-citta have the hadaya-vatthu as their physical base.

The vatthu is the place of origin not only of citta, but also of
cetasikas arising together with the citta. Thus, except in the planes
of existence where there is only nāma there has to be rūpakkhandha as
well when the four nāmakkhandhas, which include citta and cetasikas,
arise. 

The sense-bases, citta and the objects experienced by citta can be
classified as twelve āyatanas, translated sometimes as
``sense-fields''
(Vis. XV, 1-17) @footnote{See also Book of Analysis, Vibhaṅnga, II,
Analysis of Bases. Also in other parts of the scriptures, including the
suttas, there is reference to this classification.}. There are six
inward āyatanas and six outward āyatanas. They are classified as
follows:

@multitable @columnfractions .3 .4

@headitem six inward āyatanas @tab six outward āyatanas
@item eyesense @tab visible object
@item earsense @tab sound
@item smelling-sense @tab odour
@item tasting-sense @tab taste
@item bodysense @tab tangible object
@item mind-base (manāyatana) @tab mind-object (dhammāyatana)

@end multitable

Mind-base, manāyatana, includes all cittas; mind-object, dhammāyatana,
includes cetasikas, subtle rūpas and nibbāna. When we see, hear or
think we believe that a self experiences objects, but in reality there
is the association of the inward āyatana and the outward āyatana, the
objects
``outside''.
This classification can remind us that all our experiences are
dependent on conditions. We read in the Visuddhimagga (XV, 15), in the
section on the āyatanas, about conditioned realities:

@quotation
@dots{}they do not come from anywhere previous to their arising, nor do
they go anywhere after their falling away. On the contrary, before
their arising they had no individual essence, and after their falling
away their individual essences are completely dissolved. And they occur
without power (being exercisable over  them)@footnote{There is no self
who could control them.} since they exist in dependence on
conditions@enddots{}

Likewise they should be regarded as incurious and uninterested. For it
does not occur to the eye and visible object, etc.,
``Ah, that consciousness might arise
from our concurrence''. And as door,
physical basis, and object, they have no curiosity about, or interest
in, arousing consciousness. On the contrary, it is the absolute rule
that eye-consciousness, etc., come into being with the union of eye
with visible object, and so on. So they should be regarded as incurious
and uninterested@enddots{}

@end quotation

 It is useful to become familiar with different classifications of
realities, such as the classification by way of kicca, function,
ārammaṇa, object, dvāra, doorway, vatthu, physical base, āyatana,
sensefield, and other classifications. In this way we will have a
clearer understanding of citta and of the conditions for its arising.
We should, however, remember that this kind of understanding is not yet
the wisdom which eradicates lobha, dosa and moha. In the Kindred
Sayings (III, Khandha-vagga, Kindred Sayings about Rādha, chapter I,
paragraph 4, To be understood) we read:

@quotation

At Sāvatthī@enddots{}

As the venerable Rādha thus sat at one side the Exalted One addressed
him thus:  @minus{} 

``I will show you the things to be
understood, and the understanding, and the person who has understood.
Do you listen to it.''

The Exalted One thus spoke: ``And what,
Rādha, are the things to be understood? Body, Rādha, is a thing to be
understood; so is feeling, perception, the activities
(saṅkhārakkhandha). Consciousness is a thing to be understood. These,
Rādha, are the things to be understood.

And what, Rādha, is understanding?

The destruction of lust, the destruction of hatred, the destruction of
ignorance,  @minus{} this, Radhā, is called
`understanding'.

And who, Rādha, is the person who has understood?

`Worthy', should he be called, that
venerable one of such and such a name, of such and such a
clan:  @minus{} that, Rādha, is the meaning of `the person who
has understood'.``

Sometimes the Buddha reminded people of the purpose of the teachings in
a longer discourse, sometimes in a shorter discourse, but one has to be
often reminded of the goal. What is the purpose of understanding if it
does not lead to the eradication of defilements?

@end quotation

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Can citta know an object, ārammaṇa, without being dependent on any
doorway?

@item
Through how many doors can citta know an ārammaṇa?

@item
Through how many doors does the five-door-adverting-consciousness
(pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta) experience an object?

@item
Through how many doors does mind-door-adverting-consciousness
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta) experience an object?

@item
Through how many doors does hearing-consciousness (sota-viññāṇa)
experience an object?

@item
Through how many doors does santīraṇa-citta perform the function of 
investigating, santīraṇa?

@item
Does santīraṇa-citta perform the function of paṭisandhi in
dependence on a doorway?

@item
Of how many cittas is the eye-base (cakkhu-vatthu) the place of
origin? 

@item
Can the earsense (sotappasāda-rūpa) be door, dvāra, or base, vatthu,
or both?

@item
What are the respective functions of dvāra and vatthu?

@end enumerate    

@node Elements
@chapter Elements

The Buddha spoke about realities as elements, dhātus @footnote{Dhātu is
derived from dharati, to hold or to bear. Dhātu is that which bears its
own intrinsic nature; it is a reality which has its own characteristic.
}, in order to remind us that they are non-self. When we speak about
elements we usually think of elements in chemistry or physics. In
chemistry and physics matter is analysed into elements, but it may seem
strange to us to regard the eye or seeing as elements. We are not used
to considering them as elements because we are inclined to take them
for self. 

What we take for self are only nāma-elements and rūpa-elements which
arise because of their appropriate conditions and then fall away again.
Eyesense is only an element which has its own characteristic and is
devoid of self; it is rūpa which arises because of conditions and then
falls away again. Seeing is only an element which has its own
characteristic and is devoid of self; it is nāma which arises because
of conditions and falls away again.

In the Buddha's teachings realities are classified as
elements, @dfn{dhātus}, some of which are rūpa and some of which are nāma.
There are different ways of classifying realities as elements. When
they are classified as eighteen elements, they are as follows:

@emph{The five senses:}

@enumerate

@item
Eye-element (cakkhu-dhātu)

@item
Ear-element (sota-dhātu)

@item
Nose-element (ghāna-dhātu)

@item
Tongue-element (jivhā-dhātu)

@item
Body-element (kāya-dhātu, which is the bodysense)

@end enumerate

@emph{The five objects (experienced through the five senses):}

@enumerate 6

@item
Visible object-element (rūpa-dhātu)

@item
Sound-element (sadda-dhātu)

@item
Smell-element (gandha-dhātu)

@item
Taste-element (rasa-dhātu)

@item
Element of tangible objects (phoṭṭhabba-dhātu), comprising the
following three kinds of rūpa: earth-element (solidity), appearing as
hardness or softness, fire-element (temperature), appearing as heat
or cold, wind-element, appearing as motion or pressure

@end enumerate

@emph{The dvi-pañca-viññāṇas (the ``five
pairs'' of sense-cognitions,
experiencing the  five sense-objects):}

@enumerate 11

@item
Seeing-consciousness-element (cakkhu-viññāṇa-dhātu) 

@item
Hearing-consciousness-element (sota-viññāṇa-dhātu)

@item
Smelling-consciousness-element (ghāna-viññāṇa-dhātu)

@item
Tasting-consciousness-element (jivhā-viññāṇa-dhātu)

@item
Body-consciousness-element (kāya-viññāṇa-dhātu)

@end enumerate

@emph{In addition, there are three more elements:}

@enumerate 16 

@item
Mind-element (mano-dhātu) 

@item
Dhamma-dhātu

@item
Mind-consciousness-element (mano-viññāṇa-dhātu)

@end enumerate

Thus, in this classification there are eighteen elements in all. The
five elements which are the five senses are rūpa and the five elements
which are the sense objects experienced through the sense-doors are
rūpa as well. The five elements which are the dvi-pañca-viññāṇas,
experiencing these objects, are nāma. There are two cittas which are
seeing-consciousness-element since seeing-consciousness is either
kusala vipāka or akusala vipāka. It is the same with the other
pañca-viññāṇas. Thus there are five pairs of citta which are
collectively called the pañca-viññāṇa-dhātu. 

The element which is mind-element or mano-dhātu is nāma. Mano-dhātu
comprises the pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta,
five-door-adverting-consciousness, and the two types of
sampaṭicchana-citta, receiving-consciousness, which are kusala vipāka
and akusala vipāka. Thus, three kinds of citta are mano-dhātu. 

Dhamma-dhātu comprises cetasikas, the subtle rūpas (sukhuma rūpas) and
nibbāna. Thus, dhamma-dhātu comprises both nāma and rūpa. Dhamma-dhātu
is not identical with dhammārammaṇa, mind-objects. Cittas are included
in dhammārammaṇa but not in dhamma-dhātu. Cittas have been classified
separately as different dhātus. Concepts, which are included in
dhammārammaṇa, are not classified as elements, because concepts are not
paramattha dhammas; only paramattha dhammas are classified as elements.

Mind-consciousness-element, the mano-viññāṇa-dhātu, is nāma.
Mind-consciousness-element includes all cittas except the
dvi-pañca-viññāṇas and the three kinds of cittas classified as
mind-element, mano-dhātu. For example, santīraṇa-citta (the
investigating-consciousness), mano-dvārāvajjana-citta (the
mind-door-advertingconsciousness), and cittas performing the function
of javana @footnote{See Chapter 14.} such as lobha-mūla-citta and also
bhavanga-citta are included in mind-consciousness-element. Mind-element
includes cittas which can experience an object through one of the five
sense-doors, whereas mind-consciousness-element includes cittas which
can experience an object through six doors as well as cittas which are
not dependent on any doorway @footnote{The rebirth-consciousness, the
bhavanga-citta (life-continuum) and the dying-consciousness.}. 

Viññāṇa-dhātu is a collective name for all cittas. When cittas are
classified as elements, they are the seven classes of viññāṇa-dhātu,
namely: 

@itemize

@item
pañca-viññāṇa-dhātu (which are five classes)

@item
mano-dhātu, mind-element

@item
mano-viññāṇa-dhātu, mind-consciousness-element

@end itemize

It is important to remember this classification of cittas, because in
the teachings and the commentaries, and also in the Visuddhimagga,
different types of cittas are often denoted as the elements which are
classified above. If we do not remember which cittas are mind-element
and which cittas are mind-consciousness-element, we will not know which
citta is referred to in the texts. 

Sometimes the Buddha spoke about six elements; or he classified
realities as two elements. There are many different ways of classifying
realities, but no matter in which way they are classified, as khandhas,
by way of objects, ārammaṇas, as āyatanas, as dhātus, or in any other
way, we should remember the purpose of classifying realities:
understanding that what we take for self are only nāma-elements and
rūpa-elements. 

In the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta (Discourse on the Applications of Mindfulness,
Middle Length Sayings I, no. 10) we read in the section on
``mindfulness of the
body'', that the Buddha spoke about
the body in terms of elements. The text states:

@quotation

And again, monks, a monk reflects on this body according to how it is
placed or disposed in respect of the elements, thinking:
``In this body there is the element of
extension @footnote{Solidity.}, the element of cohesion, the element
of heat, the element of motion.''
Monks, even as a skilled cattle-butcher, or his apprentice, having
slaughtered a cow, might sit displaying its carcase at a cross-roads,
even so, monks, does a monk reflect on this body itself according to
how it is placed or disposed in respect of the elements, thinking:
''In this body there is the element
of extension, the element of cohesion, the element of heat, the element
of motion''. Thus he fares along
contemplating the body in the body internally@dots{}and he fares along
independently of and not grasping anything in the world. It is thus
too, monks, that a monk fares along contemplating the body in the
body@enddots{}

@end quotation

The Visuddhimagga (XI, 30) states:

@quotation

What is meant? Just as the butcher, while feeding the cow, bringing it
to the shambles, keeping it tied up after bringing it there,
slaughtering it, and seeing it slaughtered and dead, does not lose the
perception
``cow''
so long as he has not carved it up and divided it into parts; but when
he has divided it up and is sitting there, he loses the perception
``cow''
and the perception
``meat''
occurs; he does not think ``I am
selling cow'' or
``They are carrying cow
away'', but rather he thinks
``I am selling
meat'' or
``They are carrying meat
away''; so too this bhikkhu, while
still a foolish ordinary person  @minus{} both formerly as a layman and as one
gone forth into homelessness  @minus{} , does not lose the perception
``living
being'' or
``man''
or
``person''
so long as he does not, by resolution of the compact into elements,
review this body, however placed, however disposed, as consisting of
elements. But when he does review it as consisting of elements, he
loses the perception ``living
being'' and his mind establishes
itself upon elements@enddots{}

@end quotation

It may not be appealing to see the body as elements. We think of people
as ``this
man'' or
``that
woman''. We are not used to analysing
what we take for a
``person''
just as we analyse matter, for example, in physics. We might find it
crude to think of a body which is carved up and divided up into parts,
just as a cow is carved up by a butcher. However, if we consider the
body as it is, there are only elements. Isn't it true
that there are solidity, cohesion, temperature and motion? Are these
realities
``self'',
or are they elements devoid of
``self''?

Do the four elements of solidity, cohesion, temperature and motion have
anything to do with our daily life? We can find out that these elements
arise all the time. Temperature can appear either as heat or cold; do
we not feel heat or cold very often? When we are stung by an insect we
can experience the characteristic of heat. We can feel impact of
hardness or softness on our body when we are lying down, sitting,
walking or standing. That is the element of solidity appearing in our
daily life. If we are mindful of the characteristics of the elements
more often, we will see things as they are.

The Buddha reminded people of the truth in many different ways.
Sometimes he spoke about the body as a corpse in different stages of
dissolution. Or he spoke about the
``parts of the
body'' and he explained that the body
is full of impurities, in order to remind people that what they take
for ``my
body'' are only elements which are
devoid of beauty, which are impermanent, dukkha and not self.

We read in the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta, in the section on
``mindfulness of the
body'': 

@quotation

Monks, it is like a double-mouthed provision bag that is full of various
kinds of grain such as hill-paddy, paddy, kidney beans, peas, sesamum,
rice; and a keen-eyed man, pouring them out, were to reflect:
``That's hill-paddy,
that's paddy, that's kidney beans,
that's peas, that's sesamum,
that's rice.'' Even
so, monks, does a monk reflect on precisely this body itself, encased
in skin and full of various impurities, from the soles of the feet up
and from the crown of the head down@enddots{}

@end quotation

Not only the body, but also the mind should be considered as elements.
There is nothing in our life which is not an element. Our past lives
were only elements and our future lives will only be elements. We are
inclined to think of our future life and wish for a happy rebirth. We
should, however, realize that there is no self which in the future will
have another existence; there are and will be only elements. We have
learnt to classify citta in different ways and this can remind us that
cittas are only elements. Not only cittas are elements, but cetasikas
too are elements. We are attached to happy feeling and we dislike
unpleasant feeling. Feelings, however, are only elements which arise
because of conditions. When we are tired or sick we take tiredness and
sickness for self and we have aversion. Why do we not accept unpleasant
things as they come to us, since they are only elements? One might not
be inclined to see realities as elements, but it is the truth. One
might not like to remember that things are impermanent, that birth is
followed by ageing, sickness and death, but it is the truth. Why do we
not want to see the truth?

In the Discourse on the Manifold Elements (Middle Length Sayings III,
no. 115) we read that the Buddha, while he was staying in the Jeta
Grove, in Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery, said to the
monks:

@quotation

``Whatever fears arise, monks, all arise
for the fool, not the wise man. Whatever troubles arise, all arise for
the fool, not the wise man. Whatever misfortunes arise, all arise for
the fool, not the wise man@dots{}Monks, there is not fear, trouble,
misfortune for the wise man. Wherefore, monks, thinking,
`Investigating, we will become wise',
this is how you must train yourselves,
monks.''

When this had been said, the venerable Ānanda spoke thus to the Lord:
``What is the stage at which it
suffices to say, revered sir: `Investigating, the monk
is wise'?''

``Ānanda, as soon as a monk is skilled
in the elements and skilled in the sense-fields (āyatanas) and skilled
in conditioned genesis @footnote{Dependent Origination, the
conditional arising of phenomena.} and skilled in the possible and the
impossible @footnote{Right understanding of what is possible according
to conditions and what is impossible.}, it is at this stage, Ānanda,
that it suffices to say, `Investigating, the monk is
wise.' ``

``But, revered sir, at what stage does
it suffice to say, `The monk is skilled in the
elements'?''

``There are these eighteen elements,
Ānanda: the element of eye, the element of visible object, the element
of visual consciousness; the element of ear, the element of sound, the
element of auditory consciousness; the element of nose, the element of
smell, the element of olfactory consciousness; the element of tongue,
the element of taste, the element of gustatory consciousness; the
element of body, the element of tangible object, the element of
body-consciousness; the element of mind, the element of mind-objects,
the element of mental consciousness. When, Ānanda, he knows and sees
these eighteen elements, it is at this stage that it suffices to say,
`The monk is skilled in the elements. `
``

``Might there be another way also,
revered sir, according to which it suffices to say,
`The monk is skilled in the
elements'?''

``There might be, Ānanda. There are
these six elements, Ānanda: the element of extension, the element of
cohesion, the element of radiation (heat), the element of mobility, the
element of space, the element of consciousness. When, Ānanda, he knows
and sees these six elements, it is at this stage that it suffices to
say, `The monk is skilled in the
elements.' ``

``Might there be another way also,
revered sir, according to which it suffices to say,
`The monk is skilled in the
elements'?''

``There might be, Ānanda. There are
these six elements, Ānanda: the element of happiness, the element of
anguish, the element of gladness, the element of sorrowing, the element
of equanimity, the element of ignorance. When, Ānanda, he knows and
sees these six elements, it is at this stage that it suffices to say,
`The monk is skilled in the
elements'.''

@end quotation

The Buddha then explained still other ways of being skilled in the
elements and further on we read that Ānanda asked again:

@quotation

``Might there be another way also,
revered sir, according to which it suffices to say,
`The monk is skilled in the
elements'?''

``There might be, Ānanda. There are
these two elements, Ānanda: the element that is constructed @footnote{
saṅkhata} and the element that is unconstructed @footnote{asaṅkhata}.
When, Ānanda, he knows and sees these two elements, it is at this stage
that it suffices to say, `The monk is skilled in the
elements'.''

@end quotation

The element which is
``constructed''
(sankhata), is all conditioned realities (the five khandhas), and the
element which is
``unconstructed''
(asaṅkhata), is nibbāna. Also nibbāna is an element, it is not a
person, it is devoid of self, anattā. We read in this sutta about the
monk who knows and sees the elements. Knowing and seeing the elements
does not mean only knowing them in theory and thinking about them. One
knows and sees the elements when there is paññā which realizes nāma and
rūpa as they are: only elements, not self. This knowledge will lead to
the end of fears, troubles and misfortunes, to the end of dukkha.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
When realities are classified as eighteen elements, what element is
cetasika?

@item
Which paramattha dhammas are viññāṇa-dhātu (consciousness-element)?

@item
Is mind-consciousness-element (mano-viññāṇa-dhātu) included in
viññāṇa-dhātu?

@item
Through how many doors can mind-element (mano-dhātu) experience an
object?

@item
Why is also nibbāna an element?

@end enumerate 

@node The Sobhana Cittas in our Life
@chapter The Sobhana Cittas in our Life

There are many different types of citta which arise in our life and they
can be classified in different ways. When they are classified by way of
four
``jātis''
(jāti  means
``birth''
or
``nature''),
they are: 

@enumerate

@item
Kusala cittas (wholesome cittas)

@item
Akusala cittas (unwholesome cittas)

@item
Vipākacittas (cittas which are result)

@item
Kiriyacittas (cittas which are
``inoperative'',
neither cause nor result)

@end enumerate

Another way of classifying cittas is as follows:

@enumerate

@item
Sobhana cittas, cittas accompanied by sobhana (beautiful ) cetasikas

@item
Asobhana cittas, cittas unaccompanied by sobhana cetasikas. 

@end enumerate

Akusala cittas and ahetuka cittas are asobhana cittas, they are not
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas. As we have seen, there are twelve
types of akusala cittas. They are: 

@itemize

@item
8 types of lobha-mūla-citta (cittas rooted in attachment)

@item
2 types of dosa-mūla-citta (cittas rooted in aversion)

@item
2 types of moha-mūla-citta (cittas rooted in ignorance) 

@end itemize

Ahetuka cittas are cittas without roots and unaccompanied by sobhana
cetasikas, and thus they are asobhana. As we have seen, there are
eighteen types of ahetuka cittas. Summarising them, they are: 

@itemize

@item
10 dvi-pañca-viññāṇas, which are ahetuka vipākacittas (the five pairs
of seeing, hearing, etc.)

@item
2 sampaṭicchana-cittas, receiving-consciousness, which are ahetuka
vipāka cittas (one akusala vipāka and one kusala vipāka)

@item
3 santīraṇa-cittas, investigating-consciousness, which are ahetuka
vipāka cittas (one akusala vipāka, one kusala vipāka, accompanied by upekkhā, and one kusala vipāka, accompanied by somanassa)

@item
1 pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta, five-door-adverting-consciousness, which is
ahetuka kiriyacitta

@item
1 mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, mind-door-adverting-consciousness, which is
ahetuka kiriyacitta

@item
1 hasituppāda-citta, an ahetuka kiriyacitta which can produce the smile
of an arahat

@end itemize

Thus, there are thirty asobhana cittas: twelve akusala cittas and
eighteen ahetuka cittas. 

There are also sobhana cittas arising in our life, cittas which are
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas. Three among the sobhana cetasikas are
hetu, root. They are: alobha (non-attachment), adosa (non-aversion) and
amoha or paññā, wisdom. Sobhana cittas are always accompanied by the
two sobhana hetus of alobha and adosa and they may or may not be
accompanied by paññā. Thus, sobhana cittas are sahetuka, accompanied by
hetus. When we perform dāna (generosity), observe sīla (morality) or
apply ourselves to bhāvanā (which comprises samatha, vipassanā and the
study or teaching of Dhamma), there are kusala cittas, accompanied by
sobhana cetasikas. Thus, kusala cittas are among the sobhana cittas.

The kusala cittas which perform dāna, observe sīla or apply themselves
to bhāvanā are cittas belonging to the lowest plane of consciousness,
the ``sense
sphere''; they are kāmāvacara cittas.
Kāmāvacara cittas are the cittas we have in daily life, when, for
example, we are seeing, thinking or wishing for something. Sometimes
kāmāvacara cittas arise with sobhana hetus (beautiful roots), sometimes
with akusala hetus, and sometimes without any hetus. Dāna, sīla and
bhāvanā is performed by kāmāvacara kusala cittas; these kinds of kusala
kamma can be performed in daily life, where there are
sense-impressions. Kāmāvacara kusala cittas are called mahā-kusala
cittas (``mahā'' means ``many'' or ``great'').

For those who attain jhāna (absorption, developed in samatha, tranquil
meditation) there is at that moment no seeing, hearing or any other
sense-impression; then the citta is not kāmāvacara citta, but it is of
a higher plane of consciousness. The jhānacittas can be rūpāvacara
cittas (rūpa-jhānacittas) or arūpāvacara cittas (arūpa jhānacittas).
However, while one is developing samatha the cittas are mahā-kusala
cittas before one attains jhāna.

When enlightenment is attained and the citta experiences nibbāna, the
citta is of the lokuttara bhūmi, the
``supramundane''
plane of consciousness (bhūmi is plane). However, lokuttara kusala
cittas, magga-cittas, are preceded by mahā-kusala cittas in the process
of cittas during which enlightenment is attained.

We would like to have kusala cittas more often. We may think that the
circumstances of our life or other people hinder the arising of kusala
citta, but this is not so. The real cause that kusala cittas seldom
arise is our lack of development of what is wholesome. If we know the
conditions for the development of kusala, there will be more kusala
cittas in our life. Through the study of the Dhamma we will learn how
to develop kusala. If we have not studied Dhamma we may think that we
are performing kusala while we have, on the contrary, akusala cittas.
For example, we may think that when we give something away, there are
only kusala cittas. However, lobha-mūla-cittas may also arise. We may
give something to friends and expect them to be kind to us in return.
This is not kusala but lobha, attachment. When we study Dhamma we learn
that the pure way of giving is giving without expecting anything in
return. When we perform wholesome deeds our aim should be to have less
selfishness, and this is beneficial both for ourselves and for others.

People have different accumulations and these are conditions for the
arising of kusala cittas and akusala cittas. For example, when people
visit a temple and see others presenting gifts to the monks, they may,
because of their accumulations, react in different ways. Some people
may appreciate someone else's good deeds; others may
not be interested at all. If one would know the value of kusala and
realize that appreciating the good deeds of others is a way of dāna,
one would use more opportunities to develop kusala. 

If the Buddha had not attained enlightenment and taught Dhamma we would
not have any means of knowing ourselves thoroughly; we would not have a
precise knowledge of our kusala cittas and akusala cittas and of the
conditions for their arising. The Buddha taught people how to develop
wholesomeness and eradicate defilements, and therefore, living
according to the precepts and performing other kinds of wholesomeness
is the way to pay respect to him. We read in the Mahā-Parinibbāna-sutta
(Dialogues of the Buddha II, no. 16, chapter V, 137,138) that before
the Buddha passed away, the twin Sāla trees, which were full of flowers
although it was not the season, dropped their flowers all over his
body, that heavenly Mandārava-flowers and sandalwood-powder descended
on his body, and that heavenly music sounded, out of reverence for him.
The Buddha said to Ānanda: 

@quotation
Now it is not thus, Ānanda, that the Tathāgata is rightly honoured,
reverenced, venerated, held sacred or revered. But the monk or the nun,
the devout man or the devout woman, who continually fulfils all the
greater and lesser duties, who is correct in life, walking according to
the precepts @minus{}it is he who rightly honours, reverences, venerates,
holds sacred, and reveres the Tathāgata with the worthiest homage.
Therefore, O Ānanda, be constant in the fulfilment of the greater and
of the lesser duties, and be correct in life, walking according to the
precepts; and thus, Ānanda, should it be taught.
@end quotation

We all have in our daily life opportunities for dāna and sīla. As
regards bhāvanā, this comprises samatha and vipassanā, and the studying
of Dhamma or explaining it to others. Not only the monks but also
laypeople can study and teach Dhamma. We read in the
Mahā-Parinibbāna-sutta (chapter III, 112, 113) that the Buddha told
Ānanda that Māra, the Evil One, had said to the Buddha after his
enlightenment that it was now the time for him to pass away. The Buddha
said:

@quotation
And when he had thus spoken, Ānanda, I addressed Māra, the Evil One, and
said:- ``I shall not pass away, O
Evil One! Until not only the monks and nuns of the Order, but also the
laydisciples of either sex shall have become true hearers, wise and
well trained, ready and learned, carrying the teachings in their
memory, masters of the lesser corollaries that follow from the larger
doctrine, correct in life, walking according to the precepts@minus{}until
they, having thus themselves learned the doctrine, shall be able to
tell others of it, preach it, make it known, establish it, open it,
minutely explain it and make it clear@minus{}until they, when others start
vain doctrine easy to be refuted by the truth, shall be able in
refuting it to spread the wonder-working truth abroad! I shall not die
until this pure religion of mine shall have become successful,
prosperous, widespread, and popular in all its full extent@minus{}until, in
a word, it shall have been well proclaimed among
men!''

@end quotation

The fact that we are able to perform wholesome deeds in our lives is due
to conditions, it is not due to a self. We read in the Dialogues of the
Buddha (III, no. 34, Tenfold Series, chapter IV, 276) about factors
which are helpful conditions for kusala:

@quotation

Four@dots{}that help much:-four
``wheels''
@footnote{Wheel means here: vehicle or means of success.}, to wit, the
orbit of a favourable place of residence, the orbit of association with
the good, perfect adjustment of oneself, the cycle of merit wrought in
the past.

@end quotation

As regards a favourable place of residence, living in a Buddhist country
can be a helpful condition for kusala cittas. Then one has the
opportunity to visit temples and listen to the preaching of Dhamma. The
Dhamma can change our life, it is the condition for the performing of
wholesome deeds, for dāna, sīla and bhāvanā.

As regards association with the good, this means association with the
right friend in Dhamma. If one, even though living in a Buddhist
country, does not meet the right friend in Dhamma who can help in the
search for the truth, one lacks the condition which is most helpful for
the development of wisdom and the eradication of defilements.

Perfect adjustment of oneself is
``adjusting
oneself'' with kusala, becoming
established in good qualities. There are many degrees of kusala. If one
develops the wisdom of the eightfold Path in being mindful of nāma and
rūpa, there will be less clinging to the concept of self. If there is
mindfulness of nāma and rūpa while performing wholesome deeds, one will
come to realize that no self, no person performs these deeds. In that
way kusala kamma will be purer and eventually defilements will be
eradicated.

The accumulation of kusala in the past is the fourth factor which is
helpful. The kusala kammas which were accumulated in the past are the
condition for us to go to the right place and meet the right people. It
is kamma which causes one to be born in a Buddhist country or to live
in a Buddhist country. The kusala accumulated in the past conditions
our study and practice of the Dhamma at the present time. If we
consider the factors in our life which are the conditions for kusala we
will understand more clearly that it is not self who performs good
deeds.

In the Abhidhamma we learn that there are eight types of mahā-kusala
cittas, kusala cittas of the sensuous plane of consciousness. Why
isn't there only one type? The reason is that each
type has its own conditions for its arising. If we know about these
different types and if we can be aware of them when their
characteristics present themselves, it will help us not to take them
for self. Four types of mahā-kusala cittas arise with somanassa
(pleasant feeling) and four types arise with upekkhā (indifferent
feeling). We would like to have kusala cittas with somanassa, because
we cling to somanassa. However, we cannot force somanassa to arise.
Sometimes we perform dāna with somanassa, sometimes with upekkhā. It
depends on conditions whether somanassa or whether upekkhā arises with
the mahā-kusala citta. Four types are accompanied by wisdom; four types
are not accompanied by wisdom. We may, for example, help others without
paññā or with paññā. When we realize that helping is kusala, or when we
are aware of the nāma or rūpa appearing at that moment, there is paññā
arising with the mahā-kusala  citta. Four types are asaṅkhārika
(unprompted, spontaneous, not induced by someone else or by
one's own consideration) and four types are
sasaṅkhārika (prompted, by someone else or by oneself). The eight types
of mahā-kusala cittas are the following:

@enumerate

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wisdom, unprompted
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa sampayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, with wisdom, prompted
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-sampayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wisdom, unprompted
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@item
Accompanied by pleasant feeling, without wisdom, prompted
(Somanassa-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@item
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wisdom, unprompted
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-sampayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@item
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, with wisdom, prompted
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-sampayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@item
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wisdom,  unprompted
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, asaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@item
Accompanied by indifferent feeling, without wisdom, prompted
(Upekkhā-sahagataṃ, ñāṇa-vippayuttaṃ, sasaṅkhārikam ekaṃ)

@end enumerate

Mahā-kusala cittas are not the only kind of kāmāvacara sobhana cittas
(beautiful cittas of the sensuous plane of consciousness). Mahā-kusala
cittas are cittas which are cause; they can motivate kusala kamma
through body, speech or mind which is capable of producing results.
There are also mahā-vipākacittas, which are results of kusala kamma
performed with mahā-kusala cittas. Mahā-vipākacittas are sobhana cittas
too, arising with sobhana cetasikas. There are several types of
mahā-vipākacittas because the kusala kammas which produce them are of
different kinds. 

People's deeds are not the same and thus the results
cannot be the same. People are born with different paṭisandhi-cittas
(rebirth-consciousness). Paṭisandhi-cittas are vipākacittas; they are
the result of kamma. As we have seen before (in chapter 11), human
beings can be born with a paṭisandhi-citta which is ahetuka kusala
vipāka (and in this case they are handicapped from the first moment of
life), or with a paṭisandhi-citta which is sahetuka vipāka, accompanied
by sobhana hetus. In the case of human beings, and of beings born in
other sensuous planes of existence, the paṭisandhi-citta which is
sahetuka vipākacitta is mahā-vipākacitta, the result of kāmāvacara
kusala kamma (kamma performed by mahā-kusala cittas, kusala cittas of
the sensuous plane of consciousness). Apart from mahā-vipākacitta there
are other types of sahetuka vipākacitta which are not the result of
kāmāvacara kusala kamma but of kusala kamma of higher planes of
consciousness. These types will be dealt with later on. 

There are eight types of mahā-vipākacittas. They can be accompanied by
somanassa or by upekkhā, they can be with paññā or without paññā, they
can be unprompted, asaṅkhārika, or prompted, sasaṅkhārika. They are
classified in the same way as the eight types of mahā-kusala cittas
mentioned above.

The bhavanga-citta (life-continuum) and the cuti-citta
(dying-consciousness) are the same type of citta as the first citta in
one's life, the paṭisandhi-citta. If the
paṭisandhi-citta is mahā-vipākacitta, the bhavanga-citta and the
cuti-citta of that life are the same type of mahā-vipākacitta. In that
case the functions of paṭisandhi, bhavanga and cuti are performed by
mahā-vipākacitta.

When we see a beautiful visible object or experience pleasant objects
through the other sense-doors, the citta is kusala vipākacitta, the
result of kusala kamma; however, that kind of vipākacitta is ahetuka
vipāka (arising without hetu), it is not mahā-vipāka. The functions of
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and experiencing tangible object
through the bodysense, and also the functions of sampaṭicchana,
receiving, and santīraṇa, investigating, cannot be performed by
mahā-vipākacittas, they are performed by ahetuka vipākacittas.
Tadārammaṇa-citta, a vipāka-citta which may arise after the
javana-cittas and which performs the function of tadārammaṇa,
registering or retention, can be ahetuka vipākacitta or
mahā-vipākacitta @footnote{See chapter 15. Tadārammaṇa-citta is
either ahetuka or sahetuka, accompanied by hetus. Tadārammaṇa-citta
which is sahetuka is called mahā-vipākacitta, since it belongs to the
sense sphere.}. 

There are still other kinds of kāmāvacara sobhana cittas: the
mahā-kiriyacittas @footnote{Mahā-kusala cittas, mahā-vipākacittas and
mahā-kiriya cittas are always kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the sensuous
plane of consciousness.}. The arahat has mahā-kiriyacittas instead of
mahā-kusala cittas. Since he has no conditions for rebirth he does not
accumulate any more kamma. He has mahā-kiriyacittas (inoperative
cittas) which perform the function of javana in the sense-door process
and in the mind-door process. When we experience a pleasant object
lobha may arise and when we experience an unpleasant object dosa may
arise. The arahat has equanimity towards pleasant objects and
unpleasant objects, he has no more defilements. The arahat can have
mahā-kiriyacittas which are ñāṇa-vippayutta, not accompanied by wisdom.
Arahats can have mahā-kiriyacittas which are ñāṇa-vippayutta, because
paññā does not necessarily accompany the mahā-kiriyacittas when they
are not preaching or discussing Dhamma.

The arahat has kiriyacittas which are sobhana cittas and also
kiriyacittas which are asobhana cittas. The five sense-door-adverting
consciousness, pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta, the mind-door-adverting
consciousness, mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, the hasituppāda-citta, smile
producing consciousness of the arahat which can perform the function of
javana, are asobhana kiriyacittas. These types of citta are not
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas, they are ahetuka. 

There are eight types of mahā-kiriyacittas in all. They are accompanied
by somanassa or by upekkhā, they are accompanied by paññā or not
accompanied by paññā, they are asaṅkhārika or sasaṅkhārika. They are
classified in the same way as the eight types of mahā-kusala cittas. 

Altogether there are fifty-four cittas which are kāma-bhūmi @footnote{
Bhūmi is plane; in this case, plane of citta, not plane of existence.
The difference between plane of citta and plane of existence will be
explained in chapter 20.}, or kāmāvacara cittas, cittas of the sensuous
plane of consciousness. They are:
@sp 1
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .4

@headitem 30 asobhana cittas @tab 24 sobhana cittas 

@item 12 akusala cittas @tab 8 mahā-vipākacittas
@item 18 ahetuka cittas @tab 8 mahā-kusalacittas
@item @tab 8 mahā-kiriyacittas     

@end multitable

Thus, there are thirty asobhana cittas and twenty-four kāma-sobhana
cittas (sobhana cittas of the sensuous plane of consciousness). 

There are also sobhana cittas which are not kāma-sobhana cittas, namely:

@itemize

@item
the sobhana cittas which are rūpa-bhūmi (rūpāvacara cittas, for those
who attain rūpa-jhāna)

@item
the sobhana cittas which are arūpa-bhūmi (arūpāvacara cittas, for those
who attain arūpa-jhāna)

@item
the sobhana cittas which are lokuttara bhūmi, (lokuttara cittas for
those who attain enlightenment)

@end itemize

Only kāmāvacara cittas can include both sobhana cittas and asobhana
cittas. Cittas which are rūpa-bhūmi, arūpa-bhūmi and lokuttara bhūmi
can only be sobhana cittas. 

Those who do not attain jhāna or attain enlightenment cannot know the
cittas of other bhūmis, but they can verify the truth of the
Buddha's teachings as regards the kāma-bhūmi, the
cittas of the sensuous plane of consciousness. We can find out for
ourselves whether it is beneficial to perform dāna, observe sīla and
apply ourselves to bhāvanā. We can find out whether the development of
these ways of kusala helps us to have less akusala cittas. Sometimes it
is the right moment for dāna, sometimes for sīla or for bhāvanā.
Vipassanā, right understanding of realities, can be developed at any
time, no matter whether we perform dāna, observe sīla, study or teach
Dhamma. Right understanding can also be developed when there is no
opportunity for dāna, sīla or other ways of kusala. Through mindfulness
of nāma and rūpa we come to know the different types of cittas which
arise, also akusala cittas and eventually there will be less attachment
to the concept of self. In being mindful we can verify the truth of the
Buddha's teachings. 

We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Sevens, chapter VIII, paragraph 9,
The message):

@quotation

Now the venerable Upāli came to the Exalted One, saluted and sat down at
one side. So seated, he said: ``Well
were it for me, lord, if the Exalted One were to expound Dhamma briefly
to me, so that, having heard it, I might abide resolute, alone,
secluded, earnest and zealous.''

``The doctrines, Upāli, of which you may
know: `These doctrines lead one not to complete
weariness (of the world), nor to dispassion, nor to ending, nor to
calm, nor to knowledge, nor to awakening, nor to the
cool'-regard them definitely as not Dhamma, not the
discipline, not the word of the Teacher. But the doctrines of which you
may know: `These doctrines lead one to complete
weariness, dispassion, ending, calm, knowledge, the awakening, the
cool'-regard them unreservedly as Dhamma, the
discipline, the word of the
Teacher.''

@end quotation

The Commentary to this sutta, the
``Manorathapūraṇi'',
explains the word
``knowledge''
as the penetration of the three characteristics of conditioned
realities, namely, impermanence, dukkha and anattā. The
``awakening''
refers to the attainment of enlightenment and the
``cool''
to nibbāna. 

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Which cittas are ahetuka (without hetu)? Are they  always asobhana?

@item
Do arahats have asobhana cittas?

@item
Why is the jhānacitta not kāmāvacara citta?

@item
Are mahā-kusala cittas always accompanied by somanassa (pleasant feeling)?

@item
Can vipākacitta be sobhana citta?

@item
Can kiriyacitta be sobhana citta?

@item
Why has the arahat mahā-kiriyacittas instead of mahā-kusala cittas?

@item
How many types of kāmāvacara cittas are there?

@end enumerate  

@node Planes of Existence
@chapter Planes of Existence

We are born, we die and then we are born again. It is beyond control in
which plane of existence we will be reborn; it depends on the kamma
which produces the paṭisandhi-citta (rebirth-consciousness) after the
cuti-citta (dying-consciousness) has fallen away.

At this moment we are living in the human plane. Human life, however, is
very short. When this life is over we do not know in which plane we
will be reborn. Most people do not like to think of the shortness of
human life; they are absorbed in what they experience through the
sense-doors and on account of these experiences they are happy or
unhappy. However, we should realize that happiness and unhappiness are
only mental phenomena which arise because of conditions and fall away
again. Our whole life is a sequence of phenomena which arise and fall
away again.

Many religions teach about heaven and hell. In what respect are the
Buddhist teachings different? Do we just have to believe in heaven and
hell? Through the Buddhist teachings we learn to study realities, to
study cause and effect in life. Each cause brings about its appropriate
result. People perform good and bad deeds and these deeds bring
different results; they can cause birth in different planes of
existence. A plane of existence is the place where one is born. Birth
in a woeful plane is the result of a bad deed and birth in a happy
plane is the result of a good deed. Since the deeds of beings are of
many different degrees of kusala and akusala, the results are of many
different degrees as well. There are different woeful planes and
different happy planes of existence. 

The animal world is a woeful plane. We can see how animals devour one
another and we find that nature is cruel. The animal world is not the
only woeful plane. There are different hell planes. The akusala vipāka
in hell is more intense than the sufferings which can be experienced in
the human plane. The descriptions of hells in the Buddhist teachings
are not merely allegories; the experience of unpleasant things through
eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense is akusala vipāka and akusala
vipāka is reality. Life in a hell plane is not permanent; when
one's lifespan in a hell plane is over there can be
rebirth in another plane.

Apart from the animal plane and the hell planes, there are other woeful
planes. Birth in the plane of petas (ghosts) is the result of akusala
kamma. Beings in that plane have a deformed figure and they are always
hungry and thirsty.

Furthermore, there is the plane of asuras (demons). The objects which
are experienced in the asura plane are not as enjoyable as the objects
which can be experienced in the human plane. There are four classes of
woeful planes in all.

Birth as a human being is a happy rebirth. In the human plane there is
opportunity for the development of kusala. One can study Dhamma and
learn to develop the way leading to the end of defilements, to the end
of birth and death. Birth in the human plane is kusala vipāka, but
during one's lifespan in this plane there are both
kusala vipāka and akusala vipāka. Each person experiences different
results in life: there are gain and loss, honour and dishonour, praise
and blame, happiness and misery. It is due to kamma whether someone is
born into pleasant or unpleasant surroundings, whether he belongs to a
family which is well-to-do or which is poor. The experience of pleasant
and unpleasant things through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense
are the results of kamma.

Other happy planes, apart from the human plane, are the heavenly planes.
In the heavenly planes there is more kusala vipāka than in the human
plane and less akusala vipāka. There are several heavenly planes and
although life in a heavenly plane lasts a very long time, it is not
permanent. The woeful planes, the human plane and the six heavenly
planes which are deva planes, are sensuous planes of existence.
Sensuous planes of existence are planes where there is seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, the experience of tangible object through the
bodysense and other kāmāvacara cittas (cittas which are of the sensuous
plane of consciousness). There are eleven classes of sensuous planes of
existence in all.

Those who see the disadvantages of sense-impressions may cultivate
jhāna; they can be reborn in higher heavenly planes which are not
sensuous planes. Those who attain rūpa-jhāna can be reborn in
rūpa-brahma-planes where there are less sense-impressions. There are
sixteen rūpa-brahma planes in all. One of them is the asañña-satta
plane @footnote{Asañña means: without saññā, perception or remembrance,
and satta means: being.} where there is only rūpa, not nāma. Those who
have attained the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna and who wish to have no
consciousness at all, can be reborn without citta; for them there is
only a body. These beings have seen the disadvantages of consciousness;
even happiness is a disadvantage, since it does not last. 

Those who see the disadvantages of rūpa cultivate arūpa-jhāna. If they
attain arūpa-jhāna they can be reborn in arūpa-brahma planes where
there is no rūpa. There are four classes of arūpa-brahma planes. Beings
born in these planes have only nāma, not rūpa. One may wonder how there
can be beings which only have rūpa or beings which only have nāma. When
right understanding of nāma and rūpa has been developed realities will
be seen as only elements which arise because of conditions, not a
being, not a person, no self. One will come to understand that, under
the appropriate conditions, there can be rūpa without nāma and nāma
without rūpa. 

There are thirty-one classes of planes of existence in all, namely:



@itemize

@item
4 woeful planes   

@item
1 human plane   

@item
6 deva planes   

@end itemize
@emph{The above are 11 sensuous planes} 
@itemize

@item
16 rūpa-brahma planes

@item
4 arūpa-brahma planes

@end itemize

We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Sevens, chapter VI, paragraph 9a,
Amity) about the value of wholesome deeds. They can bring pleasant
results for a long time and cause birth in different happy planes. We
read that the Buddha told the monks about his births in different happy
planes. The Buddha said:

Monks, be not afraid of deeds of merit. It is a name for happiness, that
is, meritorious deeds. For well I know, monks, that deeds of merit done
for a long time have a ripening, a blossoming, which is pleasing,
joyous and lovely for a long time.

For seven years I fostered thoughts of amity, and then for seven ages of
the world's rolling on and rolling back I came not
again to this world. Then when the world rolled on, I reached the
sphere of Radiance; then when the world rolled back, I won to
Brahmā's empty palace. Then, monks, I became Brahmā,
great Brahmā, the conqueror, unconquered, all-seeing, all-powerful.
Thirty-six times I was Sakka, the deva-king. Many times seven was I a
Wheel-turning rajah, just, righteous, conquering the four ends of the
earth, bringing stability to the country, possessing the seven gems@enddots{}

As we have seen, the fact that beings are born in different planes of
existence is due to their accumulated kamma. Plane of existence is the
place or world where one is born. Plane of existence is not the same as
plane of citta. There are different planes of citta depending on the
object (ārammaṇa) the citta experiences. There are four different
planes of citta which are the following:

@enumerate

@item
kāmāvacara cittas (sensuous plane of citta or kāma-bhūmi)

@item
rūpāvacara cittas (plane of rūpa-jhānacittas)

@item
arūpāvacara cittas (plane of arūpa-jhānacittas)

@item
lokuttara cittas (plane of supramundane cittas experiencing nibbāna)

@end enumerate

Kāmāvacara cittas can be classified as asobhana cittas (cittas not
accompanied by sobhana cetasikas) and as kāma-sobhana cittas (cittas of
the sensuous plane of consciousness, accompanied by sobhana cetasikas).

Kāmāvacara cittas arise in thirty planes of existence; they do not arise
in the asañña-satta plane, where there is no nāma, only rūpa. Even in
the arūpa-brahma-planes there are kāmāvacara cittas. 

As regards kāma-sobhana cittas, they can arise even in woeful planes.
Furthermore, they arise in the human plane, in the deva planes, in the
rūpa-brahma planes and in the arūpa-brahma planes. They arise in thirty
planes of existence, the asañña-satta plane excepted. Not all types,
however, arise in all planes of existence. 

As regards asobhana cittas, they can arise in thirty planes of
existence, but not all types arise in all planes. Lobha-mūla-cittas
(cittas rooted in attachment) can arise in thirty planes; even in the
rūpa-brahma planes and arūpa-brahma planes lobha-mūla-cittas can arise.
Dosa-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in aversion) arise in the eleven
sensuous planes of existence. It is clinging to sense objects which
conditions dosa; when one does not obtain the pleasant object one
likes, one has aversion. Dosa-mūla-cittas do not arise in the
rūpa-brahma planes or in the arūpa-brahma planes. So long as beings
live in the rūpa-brahma planes and in the arūpa-brahma planes there are
no conditions for dosa. Moha-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in ignorance)
arise in thirty planes of existence; all those who are not arahats have
moha and thus moha-mūla-cittas arise in all planes of existence, except
in the asañña-satta plane.

As we have seen, not only akusala cittas, but also ahetuka cittas are
asobhana cittas (cittas which are not accompanied by sobhana
cetasikas). As regards the asobhana cittas which are ahetuka, the
ahetuka cittas which arise in a process of cittas experiencing an
object through one of the sense-doors, can arise only in the planes of
existence where there are sense impressions. Seeing-consciousness and
hearing-consciousness arise in the eleven sensuous planes of existence
(the four woeful planes, the human being plane and the six heavenly
planes which are sensuous planes, the deva planes), and they arise also
in fifteen rūpa-brahma planes, thus, they arise in twenty-six planes of
existence. They do not arise in the arūpa-brahma planes where there is
no rūpa. 

Smelling-consciousness, tasting-consciousness and body-consciousness
arise only in the eleven sensuous planes of existence. Thus, they do
not arise in the rūpa-brahma planes and in the arūpa-brahma planes. 

Pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (five-door-adverting-consciousness),
sampaṭicchana-citta (receiving-consciousness) and santīraṇa-citta
(investigating-consciousness) arise in all planes where there are
sense-impressions, thus, they arise in twenty-six planes: in the eleven
sensuous planes and in fifteen rūpa-brahma planes; the asañña-satta
plane is excepted. 

The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta (mind-door-adverting-consciousness) arises
in all planes where there is nāma, thus, it arises in thirty planes. 

People are inclined to speculate about the place where they will be
reborn. Would we like to be reborn in the human plane? We cling to life
in the human plane and we do not always realize the many moments of
akusala vipāka we are bound to receive in this world: we are threatened
by calamities such as war and hunger; we are subject to old age,
sickness and death. Some people would like to be reborn in a heavenly
plane; they like to experience pleasant things through the senses. One
may wish for rebirth in a heavenly plane, but whether or not this will
happen depends on one's kamma. Birth is result, it
does not take place without cause. If one performs many good deeds one
cultivates the cause which will bring a pleasant result but there is no
way to know when the result will take place, this is beyond control.

Are we afraid of death? Most people want to prolong their lives. They
fear death because they feel uncertain of the future. If one is not an
ariyan (a noble person who has attained enlightenment) there may be
rebirth in hell. We do not like to think of rebirth in a woeful plane,
but there may be deeds performed in the past which can cause rebirth in
hell. Even the Buddha was in one of his former lives born in hell
@footnote{This has been referred to in the “Mūga-Pakkha-Jātaka”,VI,
no. 538.}. It is useless to think of hell with aversion and fear, but
the thought of hell is beneficial when it reminds us to develop kusala
at this moment, instead of akusala.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Streamwinning, chapter VI, paragraph 4, Visiting the sick) that while the Buddha
was staying among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu, in Banyan Park, Mahānāma
asked him how a wise lay-follower who is sick should be admonished by
another wise lay-follower. The Buddha said:

@quotation

A wise lay-disciple, Mahānāma, who is sick@dots{}should be admonished by
another wise lay-disciple with the four comfortable assurances, thus:
``Take comfort, dear sir, in your
unwavering loyalty to the Buddha, saying: He is the Exalted One,
Arahat, fully enlightened One@dots{}Teacher of devas and mankind, a
Buddha, an Exalted One. Take comfort, dear sir, in your unwavering
loyalty to the Dhamma, thus: Well proclaimed is the Dhamma@dots{}Take
comfort, dear sir, in your unwavering loyalty to the Sangha@dots{}Take
comfort, dear sir, in your possession of the virtues dear to the
Ariyans@enddots{}'' A wise lay-disciple,
Mahānāma, who is sick@dots{}should be admonished by another wise
lay-disciple with these four comfortable assurances.

Then, supposing he has longing for his parents, he should thus be spoken
to:

If he say: ''I have longing for my
parents'', the other should reply:
``But, my dear sir, you are subject to
death. Whether you feel longing for your parents or not, you will have
to die. It were just as well for you to abandon the longing you have
for your parents.''

If he should say: ``That longing for my
parents is now abandoned,'' the other
should reply: ``Yet, my dear sir, you
still have longing for your children. As you must die in any case, it
were just as well for you to abandon that longing for your
children.''

If he should say: ``That longing for my
children is now abandoned,'' the
other should reply: ``Yet, my dear sir,
you still have longing for the five human pleasures of
sense.''

Then, if he say, ``That longing for the
five human pleasures of sense is now
abandoned,'' the other should reply:
``My friend, the heavenly delights are
more excellent than the five human pleasures of sense. It were well for
you, worthy sir, to remove your thoughts from them and fix them upon
the Four Deva Kings.''

Suppose the sick man say, ``My thoughts
are removed from human pleasures of sense and fixed upon the Four Deva
Kings,'' then let the other say:
``More excellent than the Four Deva
Kings and more choice are the Suite of the Thirty-three@dots{}the Yama
Devas, the Devas of Delight, the Creative Devas@dots{}the Devas who
rejoice in the work of other devas@dots{}the latter are more excellent and
choice than the former@dots{}so it were better for you to fix your
thoughts on the Brahma World.''

Then if the sick man's thoughts are so fixed, let the
other say: ``My friend, even the Brahma
World is impermanent, not lasting, prisoned in a person. Well for you,
friend, if you raise your mind above the Brahma World and fix it on
cessation from the person pack @footnote{The five khandhas of
clinging.}. 

And if the sick man say he has done so, then, Mahānāma, I declare that
there is no difference between the lay-disciple who thus avers and the
monk whose heart is freed from the āsavas, that is, between the release
of the one and the release of the other. 

@end quotation

Being subject to birth is dangerous. No rebirth at all in any plane of
existence is better than birth even in the highest heavenly plane. If
one wants to have no more rebirth right understanding of realities
should be developed in order to realize the four ariyan (noble) Truths.
Then one is on the way leading to the end of rebirth.

The first ariyan Truth is the truth of dukkha. If we could experience,
for instance, that seeing at this moment, hearing, attachment or any
other nāma or rūpa which appears now is only an element which arises
and falls away, we would have more understanding of the truth of
dukkha. What arises and falls away cannot give satisfaction, it is
dukkha. The second ariyan Truth is the truth of the origin of dukkha.
Craving is the origin of dukkha. Through the development of the
eightfold Path there will be less craving, less clinging to nāma and
rūpa. When there finally is no more craving, there will be an end to
rebirth, and this is the end of dukkha. The third ariyan Truth is the
extinction of dukkha, which is nibbāna, and the fourth ariyan Truth is
the Path leading to the extinction of dukkha, which is the eightfold
Path.

We read in the Mahā-parinibbāna-sutta (Dialogues of the Buddha II, no.
16, chapter II, 1-4):

@quotation
@dots{}The Exalted One proceeded with a great company of the monks to
Kotigāma; and there he stayed in the village itself.

And at that place the Exalted One addressed the monks, and said:
``It is through not understanding and
grasping four Ariyan Truths, O monks, that we have had to run so long,
to wander so long in this weary path of rebirth, both you and
I!''

``And what are these
four?''

``The Ariyan truth about dukkha; the
Ariyan truth about the cause of dukkha; the Ariyan truth about the
cessation of dukkha; and the Ariyan truth about the path that leads to
that cessation. But when these Ariyan truths are grasped and known the
craving for future life is rooted out, that which leads to renewed
becoming is destroyed, and then there is no more
birth!''

@end quotation

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Why do the Buddha's teachings speak about hell?

@item
What is a plane of existence?

@item
What is the difference between “plane of
citta'' and “plane of existence”?

@item
The human plane is a sensuous plane of existence.  Are there in the
human plane only cittas which are kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the
sensuous plane of citta)?

@item
The rūpa-brahma planes are not sensuous planes of  existence. Can
there be kāmāvacara cittas in the  rūpa-brahma planes? If so, all types?

@end enumerate

@node Samatha 
@chapter Samatha 

We would like to have more wholesomeness in life, but often we are
unable to do wholesome deeds, to speak in a wholesome way or to think
wholesome thoughts. Our accumulated defilements hinder us in the
performing of kusala. We learn from the Buddhist teachings that there
are
``hindrances''
(nīvaraṇa), which are akusala cetasikas arising with akusala cittas.
The hindrances arise time and again in daily life. They are:

@itemize

@item
sensuous desire, in Pāli: kāmacchandha 

@item
ill-will, in Pāli: vyāpāda

@item
torpor and languor, in Pāli: thīna and middha

@item
restlessness and worry, in Pāli: uddhacca and kukkucca

@item
doubt, in Pāli: vicikicchā

@end itemize

@dfn{Kāmacchandha} or sensuous desire is the cetasika which is lobha
(attachment). It is attachment to the objects we can experience through
the sense-doors and the mind-door. We all have kāmacchandha in
different forms and intensities. Because of economic progress and
technical inventions there is more prosperity in life. One can afford
more things which make life pleasant and comfortable. This, however,
does not bring contentedness; on the contrary, we are not satisfied
with what we have and we are forever looking for more enjoyment and
happiness. There is kāmacchandha with our deeds, words and thoughts.
Even when we think that we are doing good deeds and helping others,
kāmacchandha can arise. Kāmacchandha makes us restless and unhappy.

Vyāpāda or ill-will is the cetasika which is dosa. Vyāpāda can trouble
us many times a day; we feel irritated about other people or about
things which happen in life. Vyāpāda prevents us from kusala. When
there is vyāpāda we cannot have loving kindness and compassion for
other people.

@dfn{Thīna} and @dfn{middha} are translated as
``torpor''
and
``languor'',
or as
``sloth''
and
``torpor''.
Thīna and middha cause us to have lack of energy for kusala. The
Visuddhimagga (XIV, 167) states concerning thīna and middha:

@quotation
@dots{}Herein, stiffness (thīna) has the characteristic of lack of driving
power. Its function is to remove energy. It is manifested as subsiding.
Torpor (middha) has the characteristic of unwieldiness. Its function is
to smother. It is manifested as laziness, or it is manifested as
nodding and sleep. The proximate cause of both is unwise attention to
boredom, sloth, and so on.

@end quotation

Don't we all have moments in a day when there is
laziness and lack of energy to perform kusala? When, for example, we
are listening to the preaching of Dhamma or reading the scriptures,
there are opportunities for kusala cittas. Instead, we may feel bored
and we lack energy for kusala. It may happen that we see someone else
who needs our help, but we are lazy and do not move. Time and again we
are hindered by thīna and middha. Thīna and middha make the mind
unwieldy @footnote{See Visuddhimagga IV, 105, where the hindrances
are mentioned as being specifically obstructive to jhāna.}.

Uddhacca is translated as
``agitation''
or
``excitement''
and kukkucca as
``worry''
or
``regret''.
Uddhacca arises with each and every type of akusala citta. It prevents
the citta from wholesomeness. As regards kukkucca, worry or regret, the
Visuddhimagga (XIV, 174) states:

@quotation
@dots{}It has subsequent regret as its characteristic. Its function is to
sorrow about what has and what has not been done. It is manifested as
remorse. Its proximate cause is what has and what has not been done. It
should be regarded as slavery.

@end quotation

When we have done something wrong or we have not done the good deed we
should have done, we might be inclined to think about it again and
again. We may ask ourselves why we acted in the way we did, but we
cannot change what is past already. While we worry we have akusala
cittas; worry makes us enslaved. Uddhacca and kukkucca prevent us from
being tranquil.

As regards vicikicchā, doubt, there are many kinds of doubt. One may
have doubt about the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, or doubt about
the eightfold Path. Doubt is akusala and a hindrance to the performing
of kusala.

All of the hindrances are obstructions to the performing of kusala. Is
there a way to eliminate them? Samatha or the development of calm is a
way to temporarily eliminate the hindrances. The calm which is
developed in samatha has to be wholesome calm, it cannot arise with
akusala citta. There is a degree of calm with each kusala citta but it
is hard to know the characteristic of calm precisely, because there are
bound to be akusala cittas very shortly after the kusala cittas. In
order to develop the calm which is temporary freedom from the
hindrances right understanding, paññā, is indispensable. If one merely
tries to concentrate on a meditation subject without right
understanding of kusala and akusala and of the characteristic of calm,
calm cannot grow. The paññā of the level of samatha does not eradicate
defilements, but it knows the characteristic of calm and it knows how
it can be developed by means of a suitable meditation subject. Akusala
citta is likely to arise time and again, even when one tries to develop
samatha. One may be attached to silence and then there is akusala citta
instead of the calm of samatha. Or one may think, when there is no
pleasant feeling nor unpleasant feeling but indifferent feeling, that
there is calm. However, indifferent feeling can arise with kusala citta
as well as with akusala citta; lobha-mūla-citta can be accompanied by
indifferent feeling and moha-mūla-citta is invariably accompanied by
indifferent feeling. Thus, when there is indifferent feeling it may
seem that one is calm, but there is not necessarily the wholesome calm
of samatha. The paññā of samatha must be very keen so as to be able to
recognize even the more subtle defilements which arise.

We read in the scriptures about people who could attain jhāna if they
cultivated the right conditions for it. Before the
Buddha's enlightenment, jhāna was the highest form of
kusala people could attain. Jhāna, which is sometimes translated as
absorption @footnote{In the suttas we also come across translations
of jhāna as “trance” or “musing”. Trance, however, gives a wrong
association of meaning.}, is a high degree of calm. At the moment of
jhānacitta one is free from sense-impressions and from the defilements
which are bound up with them. The attainment of jhāna is extremely
difficult, not everybody who applies himself to samatha can attain
jhāna. However, even if one has no intention to cultivate jhāna there
can be conditions for moments of calm in daily life; but one must have
right understanding of the characteristic of calm and of the way to
develop it.

When one applies oneself to samatha one should develop five cetasikas
which can eliminate the hindrances; they are the jhāna-factors. The
first jhāna-factor is @dfn{vitakka}, which is translated into English as
``applied
thinking''. Vitakka is a mental
factor, a cetasika, which arises with many kinds of citta; it can arise
with kusala citta as well as with akusala citta. The wholesome kind of
vitakka which is developed in samatha is one of the jhāna-factors. The
Visuddhimagga (IV, 88) states concerning vitakka:

@quotation
@dots{}Herein, applied thinking (vitakkana) is applied thought (vitakka);
hitting upon, is what is meant. It has the characteristic of directing
the mind onto an object (mounting the mind on its object). Its function
is to strike at and thresh  @minus{} for the meditator is said, in virtue of
it, to have the object struck at by applied thought, threshed by
applied thought. It is manifested as the leading of the mind onto an
object@dots{}

@end quotation

Vitakka, when it is a jhāna-factor, is opposed to thīna and middha
(sloth and torpor). In
``thinking''
of the meditation subject vitakka helps to inhibit thīna and middha
temporarily @footnote{See also the Atthasālinī, “The Expositor ”,
Part V, chapter I, 165.}. 

Another jhāna-factor is vicāra, which is translated as
``sustained
thinking''. This cetasika arises with
different kinds of citta, but when it is developed in samatha, it is a
jhāna-factor. The Visuddhimagga (IV, 88) states concerning vicāra:

@quotation
@dots{}Sustained thinking (vicaraṇa) is sustained thought (vicāra);
continued sustainment (anusañcaraṇa), is what is meant. It has the
characteristic of continued pressure on (occupation with) the object.
Its function is to keep conascent (mental) states (occupied) with that.
It is manifested as keeping consciousness anchored (on that object).

@end quotation

In samatha, vicāra keeps the citta anchored on the meditation subject.
When we continue to think of wholesome subjects such as the
Buddha's virtues or his teachings there is no
vicikicchā or doubt. Vicāra helps to inhibit doubt.

Another jhāna-factor is @dfn{pīti}, translated as
``rapture'',
``enthusiasm''
or
``happiness''.
Pīti can also arise with lobha-mūla-citta and then it is akusala. The
wholesome kind of pīti, arising with kusala citta, which is developed
in samatha is a jhāna-factor. The Visuddhimagga (IV, 94) states
concerning pīti:

@quotation
@dots{}It refreshes (pīṇayati), thus it is happiness (pīti). It has the
characteristic of endearing (sampiyāna). Its function is to refresh the
body and the mind; or its function is to pervade (thrill with rapture).
It is manifested as elation. But it is of five kinds as minor
happiness, momentary happiness, showering happiness, uplifting
happiness, and pervading (rapturous) happiness.

@end quotation

According to the Visuddhimagga (IV, 99) the jhāna-factor pīti is the
``pervading
happiness'' which is the
``root of
absorption''. When pīti is developed
in samatha it inhibits the hindrance which is ill-will (vyāpāda).
However, keen understanding is needed in order to know whether there is
akusala pīti which arises with attachment or kusala pīti. Even when one
thinks that one has wholesome enthusiasm about a meditation subject,
there may be clinging. The jhāna-factor pīti takes an interest in the
meditation subject without clinging. Wholesome pīti which delights in
the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha or in another meditation subject
refreshes the mind and then there is no aversion, no boredom as to
kusala.

Another jhāna-factor is sukha, happy feeling. This jhāna-factor is not
pleasant bodily feeling, but it is happy mental feeling or somanassa.
Sukha which is developed in samatha is happy feeling about a meditation
subject. However, as we know, happy feeling arises also with
attachment. Paññā should know precisely when happy feeling is akusala
and when it is kusala. The jhāna-factor which is wholesome sukha
inhibits the hindrances which are restlessness and regret (uddhacca and
kukkucca). When there is wholesome happy feeling about a meditation
subject, restlessness and regret do not arise.

Pīti and sukha are not the same. @dfn{Sukha}, which is translated as
happiness, bliss, ease or joy, is happy feeling. Pīti, which is
translated as joy, rapture, zest, and sometimes also as happiness, is
not feeling; it is not vedanākkhandha, but saṅkhārakkhandha (the
khandha which is all cetasikas, except vedanā and  saññā @footnote{
See chapter 2.}). When reading the English translations, we have to
find out from the context which cetasika is referred to, pīti or sukha.

The Visuddhimagga (IV, 100) states concerning the difference between
happiness (pīti) and bliss (sukha):

@quotation

And whenever the two are associated, happiness (pīti) is the
contentedness at getting a desirable object, and bliss (sukha) is the
actual experiencing of it when got. Where there is happiness there is
bliss (pleasure); but where there is bliss there is not necessarily
happiness. Happiness is included in the formations aggregate
(saṅkhārakkhandha) ; bliss is included in the feeling aggregate
(vedanākkhandha). If a man exhausted in a desert saw or heard about a
pond on the edge of a wood, he would have happiness; if he went into
the wood's shade and used the water, he would have
bliss@enddots{}

@end quotation

The jhāna-factor @dfn{samādhi} or concentration is the cetasika which is
@dfn{ekaggatā} cetasika. This cetasika arises with every citta and its
function is to focus on an object. Each citta can experience only one
object and ekaggatā cetasika focuses on that one object. Ekaggatā
cetasika or samādhi can be kusala as well as akusala. Samādhi when it
is developed in samatha is wholesome concentration on a meditation
subject. Together with samādhi there must be right understanding which
knows precisely when the citta is kusala citta and when akusala citta
and which knows how to develop calm, otherwise the right concentration
of samatha will not grow. If one tries very hard to concentrate but
right understanding is lacking, there may be attachment to
one's effort to become concentrated, or, if one cannot
become concentrated, aversion may arise. Then calm cannot grow. If
there is right understanding there are conditions for samādhi to
develop. The Visuddhimagga (XIV, 139) states concerning samādhi:

@quotation

It puts (ādhiyati) consciousness evenly (samaṁ) on the object, or it
puts it rightly (sammā) on it, or it is just the mere collecting
(samādhāna) of the mind, thus it is concentration (samādhi). Its
characteristic is non-wandering, or its characteristic is
non-distraction. Its function is to conglomerate conascent states as
water does bath powder. It is manifested as peace. Usually its
proximate cause is bliss. It should be regarded as steadiness of the
mind, like the steadiness of a lamp's flame when there
is no draught.

@end quotation

Samādhi inhibits kāmacchandha (sensuous desire). When there is right
concentration on a wholesome subject of meditation, one is at that
moment not hindered by kāmacchandha. 

Summarising the five jhāna-factors, necessary for the attainment of the
first stage of jhāna, they are:

@itemize

@item
vitakka, applied thinking

@item
vicāra, sustained thinking

@item
pīti, enthusiasm, rapture or happiness

@item
sukha, happy feeling or bliss

@item
samādhi, concentration

@end itemize

The Atthasālinī (Expositor I, Book I, Part V, chapter I, 165) states
concerning the jhāna-factors which inhibit the hindrances: 

@quotation
@dots{}For it is said that the Hindrances are opposed to the jhāna-factors,
which are hostile to them and dispel and destroy them. Likewise it is
said, in the
``Peṭakopadesa'',
that concentration is opposed to sensuous desire, rapture (pīti) to
ill-will, initial application of mind (vitakka) to sloth and torpor,
bliss (sukha) to flurry and worry (uddhacca and kukkucca), sustained
application of mind (vicāra) to perplexity (vicikicchā, doubt)@enddots{}

@end quotation

The jhāna-factors have to be developed in order to temporarily eliminate
the hindrances. For the person who wants to develop the jhāna-factors
and attain jhāna a great deal of preparation is required. We read in
the Visuddhimagga (II, 1 and III, 1) that the person who wants to
cultivate samatha should be well established in sīla (morality), which
is purified by such qualities as fewness of wishes, contentment,
effacement, seclusion, energy and modest needs. Sīla will become more
perfected by the observation of ascetic practices (as described in Ch
II of the Visuddhimagga), which pertain mostly to the monk with regard
to the use of his robes, his almsfood and his place of dwelling.

In the Buddha's time laypeople too could attain jhāna,
if they had accumulated the inclination and skill to develop it and if
they would lead a life which was compatible with its development
@footnote{An example is Nanda’s mother, about whom we read in the
Gradual Sayings, Book of the Sevens, chapter V, paragraph  10.}. One should lead
a secluded life and many conditions have to be fulfilled. Jhāna is
quite incompatible with sense desires. One has to be
``quite secluded from sense
desires@enddots{}'' in order to attain
jhāna, as we read in many suttas @footnote{For example, in the
“Middle Length Sayings” I, no. 21, Discourse on Fear and Dread.}. 

The Visuddhimagga (IV, 81) explains that sense-desires are incompatible
with the attainment of jhāna. The development of jhāna is not for
everyone. Jhāna cannot be attained if one leads a
``worldly
life'', full of sense-pleasures,
instead of a life of ``fewness of
wishes, seclusion, modest needs''. 

The Visuddhimagga (III, 129) states that one should sever anything which
can be an impediment to the development of samatha. Impediments are,
for example, travelling and sickness, and also the place where one
lives can be an impediment. One should avoid living in a monastery
which, for various reasons, is unfavourable to the development of
samatha. Thus, even before one begins to develop samatha, many
conditions have to be fulfilled.

For the development of samatha one has to apply oneself to a suitable
subject of meditation. There are forty meditation subjects which can
condition calm and these are the following:

@itemize

@item
10 kasina exercises, which are, for example, kasinas (disks) of
particular colours, the earth kasina or the kasina of light. 

@item
 10 loathsome subjects (in Pāli: asubha), the
``cemetery
meditations''.

@item
 10 recollections, comprising the recollection of the Buddha, the
Dhamma, the Sangha, virtue, generosty, deities, and also the recollections
which are: mindfulness of death, mindfulness of the body, mindfulness of
breathing and the recollection of  peace (nibbāna). 

@item
1 The perception of repulsiveness in nutriment.

@item
1 The definition of the four elements (earth, water, fire and wind).

@item
4 brahma-vihāras (divine abidings), comprising: loving kindness
(mettā), compassion (karuṇā), altruistic joy (muditā) and equanimity (upekkhā,
which in this  case is not upekkhā vedanā or indifferent feeling, but
the wholesome cetasika which is tatramajjhattatā).

@item
4  meditation subjects for the development of arūpa-jhānas (immaterial 
jhānas), which will be dealt with later on.

@end itemize

Not all subjects are suitable for everybody, it depends on the
individual which subject is a means for him to develop calm. If there
is right understanding of the way to become calm by means of a suitable
meditation subject, calm can grow, even in our daily life. Loving
kindness and compassion, for instance, can and should be developed in
our daily life, when we are in the company of other people, and then
there are kusala cittas instead of akusala cittas. Recollection of the
Dhamma includes also reflection on the teachings and this is beneficial
for everybody; it helps one to begin to understand life. While we
reflect with kusala citta on the teachings or on one of the other
meditation subjects, moments of calm can arise if we do not cling to
calm.

In the Visuddhimagga it is explained how one can develop higher degrees
of calm by means of a meditation subject. It is explained (Vis. III,
119) that meditation subjects are learned by sight, by touch and by
hearsay (words), depending on the nature of the subject. As regards the
subjects which are learned by sight (such as coloured kasinas and the
cemetery meditations), the Visuddhimagga (IV, 31) states that in the
beginning one has to look closely at the meditation subject, and that
later on one acquires a mental image
(``sign'',
in Pāli: nimitta) of it; one no longer needs to look at the original
object. At first the mental image is still unsteady and unclear, but
later on it appears ``a hundred times,
a thousand times more purified@enddots{}''
The original object, for example a coloured kasina or the earth kasina,
could have flaws, but the perfected mental image which is acquired when
one is more advanced, does not have the imperfections of the original
object one was looking at in the beginning. This perfected image is
called the counterpart sign (paṭibhāga nimitta). 

At the moment the ``counterpart
sign'' appears there is a higher
degree of calm and concentration is more developed. This stage is
called
``access-concentration''
(upacāra samādhi). The citta is not jhānacitta, it is still kāmāvacara
citta (of the sense sphere), but the hindrances do not arise at the
moment of ``access
concentration''. However, the
jhāna-factors are not developed enough yet to attain jhāna, and
moreover, there are still other conditions needed to attain it. One has
to ``guard the
sign'' (nimitta) in order not to lose
the perfected mental image one has developed.
``Access
concentration'' is already very
difficult to attain, but ``guarding the
sign'' which is necessary in order to
attain jhāna is also very difficult. The conditions for guarding the
sign are, among others, the right dwelling place, suitable food, and
avoidance of aimless talk. One should
``balance''
the five ``spiritual
faculties'' (indriyas) which are the
following cetasikas:

@itemize

@item
saddhā (confidence in wholesomeness)

@item
viriya (energy)

@item
sati (mindfulness)

@item
samādhi (concentration)

@item
paññā (wisdom)

@end itemize

Confidence should be balanced with wisdom so that one has not confidence
uncritically and groundlessly. Concentration should be balanced with
energy, because if there is concentration but not enough energy there
will be idleness and jhāna cannot be attained. Too much energy and not
enough concentration leads to agitation and then one cannot attain
jhāna either. All five indriyas should be balanced.

From the foregoing examples we see that samatha cannot be cultivated
without a basic understanding and careful consideration of the
realities taught in the Abhidhamma which are in fact the realities of
daily life. One should know precisely when the citta is kusala citta
and when it is akusala citta. One should know which realities the
jhāna-factors are and one should realize as regards oneself whether or
not the jhāna-factors are developed. One should know whether or not the
cetasikas which are the five indriyas (faculties) are developed,
whether or not they are balanced. If one does not have right
understanding of all these different factors and conditions necessary
for the attainment of ``access
concentration'' and of jhāna, one is
in danger of taking for ``access
concentration'' what is not
``access
concentration'' and taking for jhāna
what is not jhāna. Neither ``access
concentration'' nor jhāna can be
attained without having cultivated the right conditions.

Not all meditation subjects lead to jhāna, some have only
``access
concentration'' as their result, such
as the recollections of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. Some
meditation subjects lead only to the first stage of rūpa-jhāna
@footnote{Both rūpa-jhāna (“material jhāna”) and arūpa-jhāna
(“immaterial jhāna”, for which the meditation subject is no longer
dependent on materiality) are developed in different stages of jhāna.
Arūpa-jhāna is more refined than rūpa-jhāna.}, some to all stages of
rūpa-jhāna. The meditation subject which is mindfulness of breathing
can lead to all stages of rūpa-jhāna. This meditation subject which is
considered by many to be relatively easy, is one of the most difficult.
One has to be mindful of one's in-breath and
out-breath where they touch the tip of the nose or the upper-lip. This
meditation subject is not learnt by sight, but by touch: the in-breath
and out-breath are the
``sign''
(nimitta) one has continuously to give attention to. We read in the
Visuddhimagga (VIII, 208): 

@quotation

For while other meditation subjects become clearer at each higher stage,
this one does not: in fact, as he goes on developing it, it becomes
more subtle for him at each higher stage, and it even comes to the
point at which it is no longer manifest.

@end quotation

Further on (VIII, 211) we read:

@quotation

Although any meditation subject, no matter what, is successful only in
one who is mindful and fully aware, yet any meditation subject other
than this one gets more evident as he goes on giving it his attention.
But this mindfulness of breathing is difficult, difficult to develop, a
field in which only the minds of Buddhas, Pacceka Buddhas @footnote{A
Pacceka Buddha is a “Silent Buddha” who has attained enlightenment
without the help of a teacher, but who has not accumulated wisdom and
the other excellent qualities, the “perfections”, to the extent that he
is able to teach others the eightfold Path.}, and
Buddhas's sons are at home. It is no trivial matter,
nor can it be cultivated by trivial persons. In proportion as continued
attention is given to it, it becomes more peaceful and more subtle. So
strong mindfulness and understanding are necessary here. 

Mindfulness of breathing is most difficult,
``it is no trivial
matter'', as the Visuddhimagga
stated. The Buddha and his great disciples were endowed with great
wisdom and other excellent qualities and thus, for them it was a
``field''
in which their minds were at home. 

@end quotation

When one continues to be mindful of breathing, the in-breaths and
out-breaths become more and more subtle and thus harder to notice. We
just read in the quotation that strong mindfulness and understanding
are necessary here. Not only in vipassanā, but also in samatha,
mindfulness, sati, and understanding, paññā, are necessary, but the
object of awareness in samatha is different from the object of
awareness in vipassanā. In samatha the object of awareness is one among
the forty meditation subjects and the aim is the development of calm.
In vipassanā the object of awareness is any nāma or rūpa which appears
at the present moment through one of the six doors, and the aim is to
eradicate the wrong view of self and eventually all defilements.
Through samatha defilements can be temporarily subdued, but the latent
tendencies of defilements are not eradicated; when there are conditions
for akusala cittas they arise again. We read in the Gradual Sayings
(Book of the Sixes, chapter VI, paragraph 6, Citta Hatthisāriputta) that even
the monk who can attain jhāna may
``disavow the
training'' and return to the
layman's life. We read that when the Buddha was
staying near Vārānasi, in the Deer Park at Isipatana, a number of
``elders''
were having a conversation on Abhidhamma. Citta Hatthisāriputta
interrupted their talk from time to time. Mahā Koṭṭhita said to him:

@quotation

``Let not the venerable Citta
Hatthisāriputta constantly interrupt the elders'
Abhidhamma talk; the venerable Citta should wait until the talk is
over!''

And when he had thus spoken, Citta's friends said:
``The venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita should
not censure the venerable Citta  Hatthisāriputta. A wise man is the
venerable Citta and able to talk to the elders on
Abhidhamma.''

``It is a hard thing, sirs, for those
who know not another person's ways of thought.
Consider, sirs, a person who, so long as he lives near the Master or a
fellow-teacher in the holy life, is the most humble of the humble, the
meekest of the meek, the quietest of the quiet; and who, when he leaves
the Master or his fellow-teachers, keeps company with monks, nuns,
lay-disciples, men and women, rajahs, their ministers, course-setters
or their disciples. Living in company, untrammelled, rude, given over
to gossip, passion corrupts his heart; and with his heart corrupted by
passion, he disavows the training and returns to the lower life@enddots{}

Consider again a person who, aloof from sensuous appetites@dots{}enters and
abides in the first jhāna. Thinking: `I have won to the
first jhāna', he keeps company@dots{}Living in company,
untrammelled, rude, given over to gossip, passion corrupts his heart;
and with his heart corrupted by passion, he disavows the training and
returns to the lower life@enddots{}''

@end quotation

The same is said about the other stages of jhāna. We then read that
Citta Hatthisāriputta disavowed the training and returned to the lower
life. But not long after that he ``went
forth'' (became a monk) again. We
read:

@quotation

And the venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta, living alone, secluded,
earnest, ardent, resolved, not long after, entered and abode in that
aim above all of the holy life  @minus{} realizing it here and now by his own
knowledge  @minus{} for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from home
to the homeless life; and he knew:
``Birth is destroyed, the holy life is
lived, done is what was to be done, there is no more of
this.''

And the venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta was numbered among the arahats.

@end quotation

Even if one can attain the highest stage of jhāna,
one's heart can still become
``corrupted by
passion'', as we read in the sutta.
When Citta Hatthisāriputta had attained arahatship, he had realized the
``aim above all of the holy
life''. The
``hindrances''
could not arise any more.

Through vipassanā, hindrances are eradicated in the successive stages of
enlightenment. The sotāpanna (who has attained the first stage of
enlightenment) has eradicated the hindrance which is doubt
(vicikicchā); the anāgāmī (who has attained the third stage of
enlightenment) has eradicated sensuous desire (kāmacchandha), ill-will
(vyāpāda) and regret (kukkucca); the arahat has eradicated sloth and
torpor (thīna and middha) and restlessness (uddhacca), he has
eradicated all defilements.

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
Which paramattha dhamma are the jhāna-factors?

@item
Which khandha is the jhāna-factor which is pīti (rapture)?

@item
Which khandha is the jhāna-factor which is sukha (happy feeling)?

@item
When seeing now, is there ekaggatā cetasika? What is ts function?

@item
What is the function of ekaggatā cetasika which arises with the
jhāna-citta? What is its object?

@item
Why is mindfulness of breathing one of the most difficult subjects
of meditation?

@item
What is the difference between sammā-sati (right mindfulness) in samatha and sammā-sati in  vipassanā? What are their respective objects of awareness?

@item
If one only develops samatha and not vipassanā, why can the
hindrances not be eradicated?

@end enumerate

@node Jhānacittas
@chapter Jhānacittas

There are many different cittas arising in our daily life which
experience objects through the five sense-doors and through the
mind-door. Both in the sense-door process and in the mind-door process
of cittas there are javana-cittas which are, in the case of the
non-arahat, either kusala cittas or akusala cittas. The javana-cittas
are most of the time akusala cittas because we cling to all objects
which are experienced through the sense-doors and through the
mind-door. We cling to visible object and seeing, to sound and hearing,
to all the objects we experience. We cling to life, we want to go on
living and receiving sense-impressions. We may not notice when there is
clinging after seeing or hearing, especially when we do not feel
particularly glad about what was seen or heard. But there may be
lobha-mūla-cittas with indifferent feeling. There are likely to be many
moments of clinging which pass unnoticed, both in the sense-door
processes and in the mind-door processes. Time and again an object is
experienced through one of the sense-doors and then through the
mind-door and there are also mind-door processes of cittas which think
of concepts such as people, animals or things. Clinging to concepts is
likely to arise very often and thus we think most of the time with
akusala citta. When we do not apply ourselves to dāna, sīla or bhāvanā,
thinking is done with akusala citta. Even when we perform good deeds
there are bound to be akusala cittas shortly after the kusala cittas.
Seeing and hearing arise time and again, and after seeing or hearing
attachment or aversion on account of what we experience may arise. The
cittas which experience sense-objects, the kusala cittas and akusala
cittas, all the cittas which arise in our daily life are of the
``sensuous plane of
consciousness'', or kāmāvacara
cittas. 

On account of the experience of sense-objects defilements tend to arise.
Therefore wise people, even those who lived before the
Buddha's time, who saw the disadvantages of
sense-impressions, developed jhāna in order to be temporarily freed
from sense-impressions. Jhāna-cittas are not kāmāvacara cittas, they
are of another plane of consciousness; these cittas experience with
absorption a meditation subject through the mind-door. At the moment of
jhāna one is freed from sense-impressions and from the defilements
which are bound up with them. Jhānacittas comprise rūpāvacara cittas
(rūpa-jhānacittas) and arūpāvacara cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas).
Arūpa-jhāna (immaterial jhāna) is more refined than rūpa-jhāna
(fine-material jhāna), since the meditation subjects of arūpa-jhāna are
no longer dependent on materiality. Later on I will deal with their
difference.

Apart from the planes of citta which are kāmāvacara cittas, rūpāvacara
cittas and arūpāvacara cittas, there is still another plane of citta:
the lokuttara cittas (translated as
``supramundane
cittas'') which have nibbāna as their
object. Those who attain enlightenment have lokuttara cittas,
experiencing nibbāna.

Now I shall deal first with @dfn{jhānacitta}. Jhānacittas do not have as their
object visible object, sound, or any other sense-object. Jhānacittas
arise in a process of cittas experiencing a meditation subject through
the mind-door. In this process there are first kāmāvacara cittas which
experience the meditation subject and then, in that same process, the
jhānacitta arises. 

The process is as follows:

@enumerate

@item
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta or mind-door adverting-consciousness  

@item
parikamma or preparatory consciousness  

@item
upacāra, which means: proximity or access   

@item
anuloma or adaptation   cittas

@item
gotrabhū, which means: that which overcomes the sense-sphere, or ``change of
lineage''  

@item
jhānacitta, appanā or absorption (the moment of citta which 
attains jhāna)

@end enumerate

For some,
``parikamma''
(preparatory consciousness) is not necessary, and in this case there
are, after the mind-door-adverting-consciousness, only three kāmāvacara
cittas arising, instead of four, before the jhānacitta arises. Gotrabhū
(which
``overcomes''
the sense-sphere) is the last citta in that process which is kāmāvacara
citta.

In the Visuddhimagga (IV, 74) we can read about the process of cittas in
which jhāna occurs for the first time. The Visuddhimagga (IV, 78)
states that in that case only one single moment of jhānacitta arises,
which is then succeeded by the bhavanga-citta (life-continuum). After
that there is a process of kāmāvacara cittas, reviewing through the
mind-door the jhāna which has just occurred. For that person the
ability to attain jhāna is still weak, he has to continue to purify
himself of the hindrances in developing the jhāna-factors until these
have become stronger. Further on (Vis. IV, 123 and following) we read
that absorption can
``last''
only when it is absolutely purified of states which obstruct
concentration. One must first completely suppress lust by reviewing the
dangers of sense-desires and also suppress the other
``hindrances''.
When someone has become more accomplished there can be jhānacittas
succeeding one another, even for a long time. We read (Vis. IV, 125):

@quotation

But when he enters upon a jhāna after (first) completely purifying his
mind of states that obstruct concentration, then he remains in the
attainment even for a whole day, like a bee that has gone into a
completely purified hive@enddots{}

@end quotation

Jhānacittas are kusala kamma of a high degree. When jhāna has been
attained the hindrances of sensuous desire, ill-will, sloth, torpor,
restlessness, regret and doubt are temporarily eliminated. Thus one is
truly calm, at least at that moment.

As we have seen in the preceding chapter, the person who wants to
develop samatha so as to be able to attain jhāna, has to develop the
five jhāna-factors which can inhibit the hindrances, namely:

@itemize

@item
applied thinking (vitakka)

@item
sustained thinking (vicāra)

@item
rapture (pīti)

@item
happy feeling (sukha)

@item
concentration (samādhi)

@end itemize

Jhāna is developed in stages, with each succeeding stage being more
refined than the preceding one. There are five stages of rūpa-jhāna
(fine-material jhāna) in all. For the first stage of rūpa-jhāna it is
still necessary that all five jhāna-factors arise with the jhānacitta,
but at each higher stage, when one has become more advanced,
jhāna-factors are successively abandoned. When one attains to the
rūpa-jhāna of the second stage, one does not need the jhāna-factor
which is vitakka, applied thinking. At this point the jhānacitta can
experience the meditation subject without vitakka, which has the
characteristic of directing the mind unto an object and the function of
``touching''
the object. The other four jhāna-factors still arise with the
jhānacitta of the second stage.

At the third stage of rūpa-jhāna vicāra, sustained thinking, is
abandoned. At this stage one does not need vitakka nor vicāra any
longer in order to become absorbed in the meditation subject. Now three
factors remain: pīti, rapture, sukha, happy feeling, and samādhi,
concentration. At the fourth stage pīti is abandoned. There is still
sukha, happy feeling, accompanying the jhāna-citta, but pīti does not
arise. Without pīti the jhānacitta is more quiet, more refined. At the
fifth stage sukha, happy feeling, too is abandoned and indifferent
feeling (upekkhā vedanā) accompanies the jhānacitta instead. At this
stage one is no longer attached to happy feeling. The jhāna-factor
which is samādhi, concentration, remains.

 Some people can, at the second stage of jhāna, abandon both vitakka,
applied thinking, and vicāra, sustained thinking. Consequently, they
can, in the third stage, abandon pīti, rapture, and in the fourth stage
sukha, happy feeling. Thus for them there are only four stages of jhāna
instead of five. That is the reason why rūpa-jhānas can be counted as
four stages or as five stages (as the fourfold system or the five-fold
system). When we read in the suttas about four stages of jhāna, it is
the fourfold system which is referred to.

There can be up to five stages of rūpa-jhāna in all and thus there are
five types of rūpāvacara kusala cittas (rūpa-jhāna kusala cittas).
Jhānacitta is kusala kamma of a high degree and thus its result is
kusala vipāka of a high degree. Jhānacittas do not produce vipāka in
the same lifespan: their result is rebirth in higher planes of
existence. The result of rūpāvacara kusala cittas is rebirth in
rūpa-brahma planes. Rūpāvacara kusala citta can produce result only if
one's ability to attain jhāna does not decline and
jhānacittas arise shortly before dying. If rūpāvacara kusala citta is
to produce the next rebirth, rūpāvacara kusala cittas arise shortly
before the cuti-citta, dying-consciousness. The paṭisandhi-citta of the
next life is rūpāvacara vipākacitta and this arises in the appropriate
rūpa-brahma plane. It experiences the same meditation subject as the
rūpāvacara kusala cittas arising shortly before the cuti-citta of the
preceding life. The five types of rūpāvacara kusala cittas are able to
produce five types of rūpāvacara vipākacittas. 

When one is born with a paṭisandhi-citta which is rūpāvacara
vipākacitta, all bhavanga-cittas and the cuti-citta of that life are of
the same type of citta as the paṭisandhi-citta. Rūpāvacara vipākacitta
can only perform the functions of paṭisandhi, bhavanga and cuti. 

There are five types of rūpāvacara kiriyacittas which are the cittas of
the arahat who attains rūpa-jhāna. He does not have kusala cittas but
he has kiriyacittas instead. Thus, there are fifteen rūpāvacara cittas
in all. Summarising them, they are:

@itemize

@item
5 rūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item
5 rūpāvacara vipākacittas

@item
5 rūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@end itemize

Those who have attained the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna and see the
disadvantages of rūpa-jhāna which is still dependent on materiality
@footnote{The meditation subjects of rūpa-jhāna are connected with
materiality, they are learnt by sight, touch or hearsay.}, might want
to cultivate arūpa-jhāna or
``immaterial
jhāna''. The meditation subjects of
arūpa-jhāna are not connected with materiality. There are four stages
of arūpa-jhāna. The first stage of arūpa-jhāna is the
``Sphere of Boundless
Space'' @footnote{The fourth
rūpa-jhāna. Here the counting is according to the “fourfold system”.}
(ākāsānañcāyatana). In order to attain this stage of arūpa-jhāna one
has to attain first the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna in any one of the
kasina meditations (excepting the
``kasina of limited
space'') and achieve mastery in it.
We read in the Visuddhimagga (X, 6):

@quotation

When he has seen the danger in that (fine-material fourth jhāna
@footnote{The Sphere of Boundless Space, ākāsānañcāyatana.}) in this
way and has ended his attachment to it, he gives attention to the
``Base consisting of Boundless
Space'' as peaceful. Then, when he
has spread out the kasina to the limit of the world-sphere, or as far
as he likes, he removes the kasina (materiality) by giving his
attention to the space touched by it, (regarding that) as
``space''
or ``boundless
space''. 

@end quotation

As regards the ``Sphere of Boundless
Space'', the Visuddhimagga (X, 8)
explains about the
``removing''
of the kasina:

@quotation

And when the kasina is being removed, it does not roll up or roll away.
It is simply that it is called
``removed''
on account of his non-attention to it, his attention being given to
``space,
space''. This is conceptualized as
the mere space left by the removal of the kasina (materiality)@enddots{}

@end quotation

In this way he can surmount the materiality of the kasina and attain the
first arūpa-jhāna, the ``Sphere of
Boundless Space''. There are three
more stages of arūpa-jhāna, and each one of these is more subtle and
more peaceful than the preceding one. The second stage of arūpa-jhāna
is: the ``Sphere of Boundless
Consciousness'' (viññāṇañcāyatana).
The meditation subject of this stage of arūpa-jhāna is the
consciousness which is the first arūpa-jhānacitta. This citta had as
its object ``Boundless
Space''. The person who wants to
attain the second stage of arūpa-jhāna should first achieve
``mastery''
in the ``Sphere of Boundless
Space''; he should see the
disadvantages of this stage and end his attachment to it. We read in
the Visuddhimagga (X, 25):

@quotation
@dots{}So having ended his attachment to that, he should give his attention
to the base consisting of boundless consciousness as peaceful,
adverting again and again as
``Consciousness, 
consciousness'', to the consciousness
that occurred pervading that space (as its object)@enddots{}

@end quotation

The third stage of arūpa-jhāna is the
``Sphere of
Nothingness'' (ākiñcaññāyatana). We
read in the Visuddhimagga (X, 32) that the person who wants to attain
this stage should give his attention to the present non-existence of
the past consciousness which pervaded the
``boundless
space'' and which was the object of
the second stage of arūpa-jhāna, the
``Sphere of Boundless
Consciousness''. We read (X, 33):

@quotation

Without giving (further) attention to that consciousness, he should
(now) advert again and again in this way,
``There is not, there is
not'', or
``Void,
void'', or
``Secluded,
secluded'', and give his attention to
it, review it, and strike at it with thought and applied thought. 

@end quotation

Further on (X, 35) we read:

@quotation
@dots{}he dwells seeing only its non-existence, in other words its
departedness when this consciousness has arisen in absorption. 

@end quotation

The fourth arūpa-jhāna is the ``Sphere
of Neither Perception Nor
Non-Perception''
(n'eva-saññā-n'āsaññāyatana). The
object of this jhāna is the four nāmakkhandhas (citta and the
accompanying cetasikas) which attained the Sphere of Nothingness,(at
the third stage of arūpa-jhāna.) We read in the Visuddhimagga (X, 49):

@quotation

The word meaning here is this: that jhāna with its associated states
neither has perception nor has no perception because of the absence of
gross perception and presence of subtle perception, thus it is
``neither perception nor
non-perception''
(n'eva-saññā-n'āsaññaṃ). 

@end quotation

Further on (X, 50) we read:

@quotation
@dots{}Or alternatively: the perception here is neither perception, since
it is incapable of performing the decisive function of perception, nor
yet non-perception, since it is present in a subtle state as a residual
formation, thus it is
``neither-perception-nor-non-perception''@enddots{}

@end quotation

It is also explained that the feeling arising with this jhānacitta is
``neither-feeling-nor-non-feeling”
(since it is present in a subtle state as a residual formation); the
same applies to consciousness, contact (phassa) and the other cetasikas
arising with the jhānacitta.

Since there are four stages of arūpa-jhāna, there are four types of
arūpāvacara kusala cittas. They can produce vipāka in the form of
rebirth in the happy planes of existence which are the arūpa-brahma
planes. The four types of arūpāvacara kusala cittas produce four types
of arūpāvacara vipākacittas. When the paṭisandhi-citta is arūpāvacara
vipākacitta, all bhavanga-cittas and the cuti-citta of that life are of
the same type of arūpāvacara vipākacitta. Arūpāvacara vipākacitta can
only perform the functions of paṭisandhi, bhavanga and cuti @footnote{
Just as in the case of rūpāvacara kusala citta, arūpāvacara kusala
citta cannot produce vipāka in the same lifespan. Therefore it performs
only the functions of paṭisandhi, bhavanga and cuti.}. 

There are four types of arūpāvacara kiriyacittas which are the cittas of
the arahat who attains arūpa-jhāna. Thus, there are twelve arūpāvacara
cittas in all. Summarising them, they are:

@itemize

@item
4 arūpāvacara kusala cittas

@item
4 arūpāvacara vipākacittas

@item
4 arūpāvacara kiriyacittas

@end itemize

Those who have cultivated jhāna can develop the various types of
``direct
knowledge'' (abhiññā) @footnote{Also translated as “supernormal powers” or “higher intellectual
powers”.}. They should attain the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna (the
fourth according to the fourfold system and the fifth according to the
fivefold system) in the kasina meditations, and they should exercise
``complete mind-control in fourteen
ways'' (described in the
Visuddhimagga, chapter XII). For example, they should, with the
different kasina meditations, be able to attain the subsequent stages
of rūpa-jhāna in order and in reverse order. In developing the kinds of
``direct
knowledge'' or
``supernormal
powers'', one's
concentration will become more advanced. The
``supernormal
powers'' (abhiññā) are the following:

@enumerate

@item
Magical powers such as passing through walls, walking on water,
travelling through the air.

@item
Divine ear, by which one hears sounds both heavenly and human, far and
near.

@item
Knowledge of the minds of other people.

@item
Divine Eye, by which one sees the deceasing and rebirth of beings.

@item
Remembrance of one's former lives.

@end enumerate

These are the five ``mundane supernormal
powers''. However, there is a sixth
power, which is realized by lokuttara citta, namely, the eradication of
all defilements, when arahatship is attained. The sixth power is the
greatest and in order to realize it insight has to be fully developed. 

Those who have cultivated the right conditions can achieve
``marvels''.
In the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Threes, chapter VI, paragraph 60, III,
Sangārava) we read about the greatest
``marvel''.
The Buddha asked the brāhmin Sangārava about the topic of conversation
of the royal party, when they were together in the palace. The brāhmin
Sangārava answered that they were talking about the fact that in former
times the monks were fewer in number, but those possessed of
supernormal powers were more numerous, and that now it was just the
opposite. The Buddha said to him:

@quotation

``Now as to that, brāhmin, there are
these three marvels. What three?

The marvel of more-power, the marvel of thought-reading, the marvel of
teaching. And what, brāhmin, is the marvel of more-power?

In this case a certain one enjoys sorts of more-power in various ways.
From being one he becomes many, from being many he becomes one;
manifest or invisible he goes unhindered through a wall, through a
rampart, through a mountain, as if through the air; he plunges into the
earth and shoots up again as if in water; he walks upon the water
without parting it as if on solid ground; he travels through the air
sitting cross-legged, like a bird upon the wing; even this moon and
sun, though of such mighty power and majesty,  @minus{} he handles them and
strokes them with his hand; even as far as the Brahma world he has
power with his body. This, brāhmin, is called `the
marvel of more-power'.

And what, brāhmin, is the marvel of thought-reading? In this case a
certain one can declare by means of a sign `Thus is
your mind. Such and such is your mind. Thus is your
consciousness'@enddots{}''

@end quotation

The Buddha explained more about mind-reading, and then he said:

@quotation

``And what, brāhmin, is the marvel of
teaching? In this case a certain one teaches thus:
`Reason thus, not thus. Apply your mind thus, not thus.
Abandon this state, acquire that state and abide
therein.' This, brāhmin, is called
`the marvel of teaching'. So these are
the three marvels. Now of these three marvels, which appeals to you as
the more wonderful and excellent?''

``Of these marvels, Master Gotama, the
marvel of more-power@dots{}seems to me to be of the nature of an illusion.
Then again as to the marvel of thought-reading@dots{}this also, master
Gotama, seems to me of the nature of an illusion. But as to the marvel
of teaching@dots{}of these three marvels this one appeals to me as the
more wonderful and excellent.''

@end quotation

Sangārava then asked the Buddha whether he possessed all three marvels
and the Buddha told him that he did. Sangārava also asked whether any
other monk possessed them and the Buddha answered:

@quotation

``Yes, indeed, brāhmin. The monks
possessed of these three marvellous powers are not just one or two or
three, four, or five hundred, but much more than that in
number.''

@end quotation

Sangārava then expressed his confidence in taking refuge in the Buddha,
the Dhamma and the Sangha, and he asked to be accepted as a
lay-follower. 

In the Buddha's time many monks had cultivated
conditions for ``marvellous
powers''. The greatest
``marvel''
of these, however, is the ``marvel of
teaching'' since it can lead to the
eradication of all defilements, to the end of all sorrow.

For those who have accumulations for jhāna there are many benefits since
jhāna is kusala kamma of a high degree. One of the benefits is a happy
rebirth, even for those who can attain only
``access-concentration''
or upacāra samādhi (Vis. XI, 123). However, even rebirth in a happy
plane of existence is dukkha, because life in a happy plane may be
followed by rebirth in an unhappy plane. Therefore, no birth at all is
to be preferred to any kind of rebirth. This can be realized only by
developing the wisdom which eradicates defilements.

Jhāna is called in the teachings an
``abiding in ease, here,
now'' (for example, in the
``Discourse on
Expunging'', Middle Length Sayings I,
no. 8). Those who have become advanced in the development of calm can
have many jhānacittas in succession, since they have cultivated
conditions for this. They truly are
``abiding in ease, here,
now''. However, the Buddha would
point out that ``abiding in
ease'' is not the same as
``expunging''
(eradication). We read in the Discourse on Expunging that the Buddha
said to Cunda with regard to the monk who could attain rūpa-jhāna:

@quotation

The situation occurs, Cunda, when a monk here, aloof from pleasures of
the senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, may enter on and abide
in the first jhāna which is accompanied by initial thought (vitakka)
and discursive thought (vicāra), is born of aloofness, and is rapturous
and joyful. It may occur to him: ``I
fare along by expunging''. But these,
Cunda, are not called expungings in the discipline for an ariyan. These
are called ``abidings in ease, here,
now'' in the discipline for an
ariyan.

@end quotation

The Buddha said the same with regard to the attainment of the other
stages of rūpa-jhāna. With regard to the monk who could attain
arūpa-jhāna, he said:

@quotation
@dots{}It may occur to him: ``I fare along
by expunging''. But these, Cunda, are
not called
``expungings''
in the discipline for an ariyan; these are called
``abidings that are
peaceful'' in the discipline for an
ariyan@enddots{}

@end quotation

Those who have accumulated great skill for jhāna and have developed
vipassanā can attain enlightenment with lokuttara jhānacittas, that is,
lokuttara cittas accompanied by jhāna-factors of the different stages
of jhāna, according to their accumulations @footnote{This will be
further explained in chapter 23.}. Instead of a meditation subject of
samatha, nibbāna is the object which is experienced with absorption by
the lokuttara jhānacitta. In the process during which enlightenment is
attained the magga-citta (path-consciousness, lokuttara kusala citta)
is immediately followed by the phala-citta (fruition-consciousness, the
result of the magga-citta). When the phala-cittas have fallen away that
process of cittas is over. The magga-citta of that stage of
enlightenment cannot arise again, but for those who have developed
jhāna and attained enlightenment with lokuttara jhānacitta, the
phala-citta can arise again, having nibbāna as object, even many times
in life.

Those who have attained the fourth stage of arūpa-jhāna, the
``Sphere of Neither Perception Nor
Non-Perception'', and have also
realized the third stage of enlightenment, the stage of the anāgāmī or
who have realized the stage of the arahat, can attain
``cessation''
(nirodha-samāpatti) which is the temporary ceasing of bodily and mental
activities.

The person who has attained
``cessation''
(``the stopping of perception and
feeling'') is different from a
corpse. We read in the Greater Discourse of the Miscellany (Middle
Length Sayings I, no. 43) that Mahā-Koṭṭhita asked Sāriputta a number
of questions. He also asked questions about the dead body and about the
difference between the dead body and the monk who has attained
cessation. We read that Mahā-Koṭṭhita asked:

@quotation

``In regard to this body, your
reverence, when how many things are got rid of, does this body lie cast
away, flung aside like unto a senseless log of
wood?''

``In regard to this body, your
reverence, when three things are got rid of: vitality, heat and
consciousness, then does this body lie cast away, flung aside like unto
a senseless log of wood.''

``What is the difference, your
reverence, between that dead thing, passed away, and that monk who has
attained to the stopping of perception and
feeling?''

``Your reverence, the bodily activities
of that dead thing, passed away, have been stopped, have subsided, the
vocal activities have been stopped, have subsided, the mental
activities have been stopped, have subsided, the vitality is entirely
destroyed, the heat allayed, the sense-organs are entirely broken
asunder. But that monk who has attained to the stopping of perception
and feeling, although his bodily activities have been stopped, have
subsided, although his vocal activities have been stopped, have
subsided, although his mental activities have been stopped, have
subsided, his vitality is not entirely destroyed, his heat is not
allayed, his sense-organs are purified. This, your reverence, is the
difference between a dead thing, passed away, and that monk who has
attained to the stopping of perception and
feeling.''

@end quotation

For those who emerge from cessation, the first citta which arises is a
phala-citta (lokuttara vipākacitta), having nibbāna as its object. In
the case of the anāgāmī it is the phala-citta of the stage of the
anāgāmī and in the case of the arahat it is the phala-citta of the
arahat. The Visuddhimagga (XXIII, 50) states that their minds tend
towards nibbāna. We read:

@quotation

Towards what does the mind of one who has emerged tend? It tends towards
nibbāna. For this is said: ``When a
bhikkhu has emerged from the attainment of the cessation of perception
and feeling, friend Visākha, his consciousness inclines to seclusion,
leans to seclusion, tends to
seclusion'' (Middle Length Sayings I,
no. 44, 302). 

@end quotation

In the Lesser Discourse in Gosiṅga (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 31) we
read that the Buddha came to see Anuruddha, Nandiya and Kimbila when
they were staying in the Gosiṅga sāl-wood. The Buddha asked them about
their life in the forest. They could attain all stages of rūpa-jhāna
and arūpa-jhāna and they could
``abide''
in them for as long as they liked. The Buddha said:

@quotation

``It is good, Anuruddhas, it is good.
But did you, Anuruddhas, by passing quite beyond this abiding, by
allaying this abiding, reach another state of further-men, an excellent
knowledge and vision befitting the ariyans, an abiding in
comfort?''

``How could this not be, Lord? Here we,
Lord, for as long as we like, by passing quite beyond the plane of
neither perception-nor-non-perception, entering on the stopping of
perception and feeling, abide in it, and having seen through intuitive
wisdom, our cankers come to be utterly destroyed. By passing quite
beyond that abiding, Lord, by allaying that abiding, another state of
further-men, an excellent knowledge and vision befitting the ariyans,
an abiding in comfort is reached. But we, Lord, do not behold another
abiding in comfort that is higher or more excellent than this abiding
in comfort.''

``It is good, Anuruddhas, it is good.
There is no other abiding in comfort that is higher or more excellent
than this abiding in comfort.''

@end quotation

@heading Questions

@enumerate

@item
What is the advantage of arūpa-jhāna, compared to rūpa-jhāna?

@item
What is the difference between the fourth stage of  arūpa-jhāna, the ``Sphere of neither perception nor non-perception'', and ``cessation''?

@item
Can anybody who has developed the fourth stage of arūpa-jhāna
attain cessation?

@item
What is the purpose of the ``supernormal powers'' (abhiññās)?

@item
When six abhiññās are mentioned, which of those is the greatest?

@item
What benefit is there for those who develop both jhāna and vipassanā and attain enlightenment?

@item
What is the object of citta at the moment of jhāna?

@item
Through which door can the jhānacitta experience an object?

@item
What is the object of lokuttara jhānacitta?

@end enumerate  

@node Lokuttara Cittas
@chapter Lokuttara Cittas

The Abhidhamma teaches us about different kinds of wholesome cittas.
There are kāmāvacara kusala cittas (kusala cittas of the sensuous plane
of consciousness, mahā-kusala cittas), rūpāvacara kusala cittas
(rūpa-jhānacittas) and arūpāvacara kusala cittas (arūpa-jhānacittas).
All these types of citta are kusala, but they do not eradicate the
latent tendencies of defilements. Only lokuttara kusala cittas,
magga-cittas @footnote{Magga means path. The lokuttara kusala citta
is called magga-citta or path-consciousness.}, eradicate the latent
tendencies of defilements. When all defilements are eradicated
completely there will be an end to the cycle of birth and death. We may
wonder whether lokuttara kusala cittas really eradicate defilements so
that they never arise again. There are many defilements. We are full of
lobha, dosa and moha. We have avarice, jealousy, worry, doubt, conceit
and many other defilements. The clinging to the self is deeply rooted:
we take our mind and our body for self. It is hard to understand how
all these defilements can be eradicated. Defilements can be eradicated
and there is a Path leading to it, but we have accumulated defilements
to such an extent that they cannot be eradicated all at once. Diṭṭhi,
wrong view, has to be eradicated first; so long as we take realities
for self there cannot be eradication of any defilement. There are four
stages of enlightenment: the stages of the sotāpanna (streamwinner),
the sakadāgāmī (once-returner), the anāgāmī (no-returner) and the
arahat. At each of these stages the lokuttara kusala citta, the
magga-citta, arises which experiences nibbāna and eradicates
defilements. The sotāpanna, the ariyan who has attained the first stage
of enlightenment, has eradicated diṭṭhi completely, so that it can
never arise again, but he has not eradicated all defilements.
Defilements are eradicated stage by stage and only when arahatship has
been attained all defilements have been eradicated. 

People may wonder how one can know that one has attained enlightenment.
The lokuttara citta is accompanied by paññā (wisdom) which has been
developed in vipassanā. One does not attain enlightenment without
having developed insight-wisdom, vipassanā. There are several stages of
insight-wisdom. First, doubt about the difference between nāma and rūpa
is eliminated. It may be understood in theory that nāma is the reality
which experiences an object and rūpa is the reality which does not know
anything. However, theoretical understanding, understanding of the
level of thinking, is not the same as direct understanding which
realizes nāma as nāma and rūpa as rūpa. When there is, for example,
sound, which is rūpa, there is also hearing, which is nāma, and these
realities have different characteristics. There can be mindfulness of
only one characteristic at a time and at such a moment right
understanding of the reality which presents itself can develop. So long
as there is not right mindfulness of one reality at the time there will
be doubt as to the difference between nāma and rūpa. There has to be
mindfulness of the different kinds of nāma and rūpa which appear in
daily life in order to eliminate doubt. When the first stage of
insight, which is only a beginning stage, is attained, there is no
doubt as to the difference between the characteristics of nāma and
rūpa. The characteristics of nāma and rūpa have to be investigated over
and over again until they are clearly understood as they are and there
is no more wrong view about them. The realization of the arising and
falling away of nāma and rūpa is a higher stage of insight which cannot
be attained so long as the characteristic of nāma cannot be
distinguished from the characteristic of rūpa. All the different stages
of insight have to be attained in the right order @footnote{See
Visuddhimagga chapter XX and XXI and “Path of Discrimination” I,
Treatise on Knowledge,  chapters V-X.}. Paññā should continue to
investigate the characteristics of realities as they appear through the
six doors so that the three characteristics of conditioned realities,
namely: impermanence (anicca), dukkha and non-self (anattā), can be
penetrated more and more. When paññā has clearly understood these three
characteristics enlightenment can be attained; paññā can then
experience nibbāna, the unconditioned reality. When paññā has been
developed to that degree there cannot be any doubt as to whether one
has attained enlightenment or not. 

The English word enlightenment can have different meanings and therefore
it may create confusion. The Pāli term for enlightenment is
``@dfn{bodhi}''.
Bodhi literally means knowledge or understanding. The attainment of
enlightenment in the context of the Buddhist teachings refers to paññā
which has been developed to the degree that it has become
@dfn{lokuttara}
paññā, ``supramundane
paññā'', which accompanies lokuttara
cittas experiencing nibbāna. Enlightenment is actually a few moments of
lokuttara cittas which do not last. Nibbāna does not arise and fall
away, but the lokuttara cittas which experience nibbāna fall away and
are followed by cittas of the sense-sphere; in the case of the ariyans
who have not yet attained the fourth stage of enlightenment, also
akusala cittas are bound to arise again. However, the defilements which
have been eradicated at the attainment of enlightenment do not arise
anymore. 

Only the right Path, the eightfold Path, can lead to enlightenment. If
one develops the wrong path the goal cannot be attained. When the wrong
path is developed one has diṭṭhi, wrong view. In the Abhidhamma
defilements are classified in different ways and also different kinds
of wrong view are classified in various ways. For example, different
kinds of wrong view are classified under the group of defilements which
is clinging (upādāna). Three of the four kinds of clinging mentioned in
this group are clinging to various forms of diṭṭhi; these three kinds
of clinging have been completely eradicated by the sotāpanna. One of
them is: ``clinging to rules and
ritual'' (sīlabbatupādāna), which
includes the wrong practice of vipassanā. Some people think that they
can attain enlightenment by following some path other than the
eightfold Path but this is an illusion. There are no other ways leading
to enlightenment.

The eightfold Path is developed by being mindful of the nāma and rūpa
which appear in daily life, such as seeing, visible object, hearing,
sound, thinking, feeling, attachment, anger or the other defilements
which arise. If the eightfold Path is not developed by being mindful of
all realities which appear in one's daily life, wrong
view cannot be eradicated and thus not even the first stage of
enlightenment, the stage of the @dfn{sotāpanna}, can be attained. Therefore,
there is no way leading to enlightenment other than the development of
right understanding of realities, which is the wisdom (paññā) of the
eightfold Path. 

What is right understanding? The answer is: seeing nāma and rūpa as they
are: impermanent, dukkha and non-self. Right understanding can be
developed. When we still have wrong view, we take realities for self:
we take seeing for self, we take visible object for self, we take
feeling for self, we take saññā (remembrance or
``perception'')
for self, we take thinking for self, we take defilements for self, we
also take good qualities such as mindfulness and wisdom for self. In
being mindful of the characteristics of nāma and rūpa which appear,
right understanding can develop and the wrong view of self can be
eliminated. 

So long as one has not become a sotāpanna one may deviate from the right
Path, there can be wrong practice. There is wrong practice, for
example, when one thinks that there should be awareness only of
particular kinds of nāma and rūpa, instead of being aware of whatever
kind of nāma or rūpa appears. People may for example believe that
lobha, dosa and moha should not or cannot be objects of mindfulness.
However, akusala cittas are realities which arise because of their
appropriate conditions, they are part of one's daily
life. If one selects the objects of awareness, one will continue to
cling to a concept of self who could exert control over
one's life. Some people believe that vipassanā can
only be developed when sitting in a quiet place, but then they set
rules for the practice, and thus, they will not be able to see that
mindfulness too is anattā.

The sotāpanna has, apart from diṭṭhi, also eradicated other defilements.
He has eradicated doubt or vicikicchā. Doubt is classified as one of
the
``hindrances'';
it prevents us from performing kusala. We may doubt about the Buddha,
the Dhamma, the Sangha, about the right practice. The sotāpanna has no
more doubt. 

Another akusala cetasika, eradicated by the sotāpanna, is stinginess,
macchariya. The Visuddhimagga (XXII, 52) mentions five kinds of
avarice:

The kinds of avarice are the five, namely, avarice about dwellings,
families, gain, Dhamma and praise, which occur as inability to bear
sharing with others any of these things beginning with dwellings.

The Atthasālinī (Expositor, Book II, part II, chapter II, 374, 375)
gives an explanation of these five kinds of avarice concerning the
monk's dwelling-place, the family he is used to
visiting in order to receive the four requisites (robes, food, shelter
and medicines), the four requisites themselves (mentioned as
``gain''),
knowledge of the Dhamma and praise (concerning personal beauty or
virtues). 

It is explained that there is stinginess if one does not want to share
any of these things with others. However, there is no stinginess if one
does not want to share these things with someone who is a bad person or
someone who would abuse these things. For instance, if one does not
teach Dhamma to someone who will abuse Dhamma, there is no stinginess
as to Dhamma. Thus we see that the eradication of stinginess does not
mean sharing everything one has with anybody. The sotāpanna has
eradicated stinginess; the five kinds of stinginess just mentioned do
not arise anymore.

Furthermore, the sotāpanna has eradicated envy, issā. Envy can arise
with dosa-mūla-citta (citta rooted in aversion). The Visuddhimagga
(XIV, 172) states concerning envy:

@quotation

Envying is envy. It has the characteristic of being jealous of
others' success. Its function is to be dissatisfied
with that. It is manifested as averseness from that. Its proximate
cause is another's success@enddots{}

@end quotation

The sotāpanna is an ariyan, a ``noble
person'', although not all
defilements are eradicated by him. He is an ariyan, because at the
moment of enlightenment, when the magga-citta arose, he became a
different person; he is no longer a
``worldling'',
puthujjana. There are no more latent tendencies of wrong view, diṭṭhi,
and doubt, vicikicchā, accumulated in the citta, and there are no more
inclinations to stinginess, macchariya, or envy, issā. 

What is a latent tendency? When we desire something we have lobha. When
the lobha-mūla-cittas have fallen away, there are other kinds of citta
which are not accompanied by lobha. However, the lobha which arose
before has been accumulated, it remains latent. When there are
conditions for its arising, it can arise again with the akusala citta.
Latent tendencies lie dormant in every citta, even in the
bhavanga-citta (life-continuum) which does not experience an object
through one of the sense-doors or the mind-door. 

The question may occur whether the latent tendency of diṭṭhi is
eradicated gradually or all at once. The answer is that in the course
of the development of right understanding diṭṭhi is gradually
eliminated until the latent tendency of diṭṭhi is completely eradicated
at the attainment of enlightenment. One cannot attain enlightenment
without having cultivated the right conditions. We see that in the
Buddha's time some people could attain enlightenment
quickly, even during a discourse; some could attain enlightenment after
a more detailed explanation of the truth, whereas others had to develop
the eightfold Path for a longer time before they could attain
enlightenment. It all depends on how much wisdom has already been
accumulated, also during previous lives. As to the attainment of
enlightenment in the present time, the right conditions have to be
cultivated; enlightenment cannot occur all of a sudden. If there is
awareness of all kinds of nāma and rūpa appearing in daily life, paññā
can investigate their characteristics and in this way it can gradually
develop. We cannot expect a great deal of sati and paññā in the
beginning. However, each moment of right awareness is fruitful, because
it can condition further moments of awareness and thus it can be
accumulated. Through the development of right understanding of nāma and
rūpa, wrong view will gradually become less, until finally the latent
tendency of diṭṭhi is completely eradicated by the magga-citta
(lokuttara kusala citta) of the sotāpanna. Then diṭṭhi will never arise
again. 

The sotāpanna has not eradicated all defilements. One may wonder whether
he can still talk in an unpleasant way to others. Of the ten kinds of
akusala kamma-patha (unwholesome courses of action) there are four
akusala kamma-patha through speech which are: lying, slandering, rude
speech and idle, useless talk. The sotāpanna has eradicated lying. He
can still speak in an unfriendly way to others or use harsh speech, but
not to the extent that it would lead to rebirth in a woeful plane. The
sotāpanna cannot be reborn in a woeful plane anymore. 

Useless talk is speech which has not as objective dāna, sīla or bhāvanā.
This is not eradicated by the sotāpanna, it can only be eradicated by
the arahat. 

The question may arise whether it is necessary to classify defilements
in such a detailed way. The purpose of the study of the Abhidhamma is
right understanding of realities. If one does not study at all one will
not be able to judge what is the right Path and what the wrong Path. We
do not live in the Buddha's time; since we cannot hear
the teachings directly from him, we are dependent on the teachings as
they come to us through the scriptures. Therefore, it is beneficial to
study the scriptures and also the Abhidhamma. It depends on
one's personal inclination to what extent one will
study the details about realities. Learning about the different ways of
classifying defilements helps us to see their different aspects. For
instance, diṭṭhi is classified under the group of defilements known as
the latent tendencies or proclivities (anusayas) and it is also
classified as one of the āsavas,
``cankers''
or
``influxes'',
which is another group of defilements. Furthermore, defilements are
classified as ways of clinging (upādānas); as we have seen, three
classes of diṭṭhi are classified under this group of defilements.
Defilements are also classified as
``bonds''
(ganthas), as
``hindrances''
(nīvaraṇas), and in several other ways. Each way of classifying shows
us a different aspect of defilements and thus we understand better how
deeply accumulated defilements are and how difficult it is to eradicate
them. Only magga-cittas (lokuttara kusala cittas) can eradicate them.
Not all defilements can be eradicated by the magga-citta of the first
stage of enlightenment. As we have seen, there are four stages of
enlightenment (the stages of the sotāpanna, the sakadāgāmī, the anāgāmī
and the arahat), and for each of these stages there is a magga-citta
which experiences nibbāna and eradicates defilements. Defilements are
progressively eradicated by the magga-citta at each of the four stages
of enlightenment. Thus, there are four types of magga-citta. There are
four types of phala-citta (lokuttara vipākacitta or
``fruition-consciousness'')
which are the results of the four magga-cittas. Only the magga-citta
eradicates defilements; the phala-citta, which also experiences
nibbāna, is vipāka, result of the magga-citta. 

At the moment of enlightenment nibbāna is the object which is
experienced by the lokuttara citta. Some people think that nibbāna is a
place which one can reach, a plane of life. In order to have more
understanding of what nibbāna is, we have to consider what our life now
is: nāma and rūpa arising and falling away. Our life is dukkha, because
what arises and falls away is unsatisfactory. If nibbāna would be a
plane where we would continue to live, there would be no end to the
arising and falling away of nāma and rūpa, no end to dukkha. Nibbāna,
however, is the unconditioned dhamma, it does not arise and fall away.
Nibbāna is therefore the end of the arising and falling away of nāma
and rūpa, the end of birth, old age, sickness and death. Nibbāna is the
end to dukkha. When one has attained the first stage of enlightenment,
the stage of the sotāpanna, it is certain that there will eventually be
an end to the cycle of birth and death, an end to dukkha. 

When the person who is not an arahat dies, the last citta of his life,
the cuti-citta (dying-consciousness) is succeeded by the
paṭisandhi-citta (rebirth-consciousness) of the next life and thus life
goes on. So long as there are defilements life has to continue. The
fact that we are here in the human plane is conditioned by defilements.
Even if there is birth in a heavenly plane, in a rūpa-brahma plane or
in an arūpa-brahma plane, it is conditioned by defilements. 

The arahat has no more defilements, he does not have to be reborn in any
plane. The arahat has to die, because he was born and birth has to be
followed by death. However, for him the cuti-citta will not be
succeeded by a paṭisandhi-citta. Thus, for him there will not be the
arising of nāma and rūpa in a new life any more, and this means the end
to the cycle of birth and death.

For some people this would seem to be the annihilation of life,
something which is frightening. We can make ourselves believe that life
is good and that it should continue forever, but if we develop insight
we will see more and more that life is nāma-elements and rūpa-elements
which arise because of their own conditions and then have to fall away;
they are beyond control, nobody can cause them to remain. We cannot
cause the arising of happy feeling, if it arises it does so because of
its own conditions. It is only present for an extremely short while and
then there may be unhappy feeling. The ideas we used to have about life
and happiness will gradually be changed. If one still clings to the
``self''
one is anxious about what will happen to the
``self''
after one's death. For the arahat the question of what
will happen after his death does not occur; he has no more defilements
and thus no more clinging to life. The ariyan knows that what the
non-ariyan takes for happiness is dukkha; the non-ariyan takes for
misery what the ariyan knows as happiness. The development of wisdom
brings a kind of happiness which is different from what one used to
take for happiness. Our defilements are the real cause of disturbance,
worry and restlessness, they are the cause of all sorrow. Nibbāna is
the end of lobha, dosa and moha, and thus the end of all sorrow. 

When one is not an ariyan one cannot really understand what nibbāna is.
If we cannot experience yet the true nature of the conditioned dhammas
which arise and fall away, we cannot experience the unconditioned
dhamma, the dhamma which does not arise and fall away. 

As we have seen, there are four paramattha dhammas: citta, cetasika,
rūpa and nibbāna. Citta, cetasika and rūpa are realities which arise
and fall away, they are conditioned dhammas and thus dukkha.
@dfn{Nibbāna}
does not arise and fall away; it has no conditions through which it
arises, it is an unconditioned dhamma. Nibbāna is the end to dukkha. If
there were no cessation of dukkha the Buddha would not have taught the
Path leading to the cessation of dukkha. However, since there is the
cessation of dukkha, the Buddha taught the Path leading to it. We read
in the Verses of Uplift (Udāna, chapter VIII, 3, Khuddaka Nikāya) that
the Buddha, while he was staying in Anāthapiṇḍika's
Park, said to the monks:

@quotation

Monks, there is a not-born, a not-become, a not-made, a not-compounded
@footnote{asaṅkhata, unconditioned, not proceeding from conditions.
}. Monks, if that unborn, not-become, not-made, not-compounded were
not, there would be apparent no escape from this here that is born,
become, made, compounded @footnote{saṅkhata, conditioned. This is
translated into English as “compounded” or “constructed”. It is
that which has been “put together ” (sankharoti), produced, by the
association  of different conditions.}. 

But since, monks, there is an unborn@dots{}therefore the escape from this
here that is born, become@dots{}is apparent.

@end quotation

Nibbāna can be experienced at the attainment of enlightenment, but
enlightenment cannot be attained unless paññā has been developed to the
degree that it can experience the conditioned dhammas as they are:
impermanent, dukkha and non-self (anattā). 

At the attainment of enlightenment the magga-citta (lokuttara kusala
citta) directly experiences nibbāna. When the magga-citta has fallen
away, it is succeeded immediately by the phala-citta (lokuttara
vipākacitta) which experiences the same object. Kāmāvacara kusala kamma
may produce vipāka in the same lifespan but never in the same process.
Rūpāvacara kusala citta and arūpāvacara kusala citta produce vipāka
only in a next life as rebirth-consciousness and bhavangacitta. It is
different in the case of the magga-citta which is followed immediately,
in the same process, by the phala-cittas, which are two or three
moments of vipākacitta, depending on the individual. 

When someone attains enlightenment of the stage of the sotāpanna, the
magga-citta and the phala-cittas of the sotāpanna arise. The
magga-citta of the sotāpanna eradicates the defilements which are to be
eradicated at that stage, and this is once and for all. Thus, the
magga-citta of the sotāpanna can arise only once in the cycle of birth
and death. 

The phala-citta can arise again in other processes of citta if
enlightenment has been attained with lokuttara jhānacitta. Someone who
has developed jhāna and acquired
``mastery''
in jhāna (Vis. IV, 131) and also develops insight can attain
enlightenment with lokuttara jhānacitta, lokuttara citta accompanied by
jhānafactors of one of the stages of jhāna. It is extremely difficult
to acquire
``mastery''
in jhāna; one should be able, for example, to determine when one enters
jhāna and when one emerges from jhāna. Only if mastery has been
acquired, jhāna can be a
``base''
for insight, that is, an object of mindfulness in vipassanā. In that
way the clinging to a self who attains jhāna can be eliminated. Those
who attain enlightenment have different accumulations and according to
one's accumulations the lokuttara jhānacittas are
accompanied by jhāna-factors of different stages of jhāna. The
phala-citta which is accompanied by jhāna-factors can arise many times
again, experiencing nibbāna @footnote{This attainment is called phala
samāpatti, attainment of fruition.}. 

Cittas can be counted as eighty-nine or as hundred and twenty-one. When
cittas are counted as hundred and twenty-one, there are, instead of
eight lokuttara  cittas @footnote{A magga-citta, lokuttara kusala
citta, and a phala-citta, lokuttara vipākacitta, at each of the four
stages of enlightenment.}, forty lokuttara cittas, and these are
lokuttara cittas accompanied by the jhāna-factors of the different
stages of jhāna. As we have seen, there are five stages of rūpa-jhāna
and at each stage jhāna-factors are successively abandoned @footnote{
See chapter 22.}, until at the fifth stage (or at the fourth stage of
the fourfold system) there are the remaining factors of samādhi
(concentration) and upekkhā (indifferent feeling) which arises instead
of sukha (pleasant feeling). Lokuttara cittas can be accompanied by
jhāna-factors of each of the five stages of jhāna. For example, when
lokuttara cittas are accompanied by jhāna-factors of the fifth stage of
rūpa-jhāna, it means that they are accompanied by samādhi and upekkhā. 

As regards arūpa-jhānacittas, they have meditation subjects which are
different from the meditation subjects for rūpa-jhāna, but the
jhāna-factors which accompany them are the same as the jhāna-factors of
the fifth stage of rūpa-jhāna, namely samādhi and upekkhā. Thus, the
jhāna-factors of the five types of rūpa-jhāna have to be taken into
account when we classify lokuttara jhānacittas, lokuttara cittas
accompanied by jhāna-factors of the different stages of rūpa-jhāna and
arūpa-jhāna. Consequently, each one of the eight lokuttara cittas can
be reckoned as fivefold and then there are forty lokuttara cittas. 

When cittas are counted as eighty-nine, they can be summarised as
follows:

@itemize

@item
12 akusala cittas   

@item
18 ahetuka cittas   

@item
8 mahā-kusala cittas  

@item
8 mahā-vipākacittas     

@item
8 mahā-kiriyacittas   
@end itemize
Above are  54 kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the sensuous plane of consciousness)
@itemize

@item
15 rūpāvacara cittas

@item
12 arūpāvacara cittas

@item
8 lokuttara cittas

@end itemize

When cittas are counted as 121, there are, instead of 8 lokuttara
cittas, 40 lokuttara cittas.

The way to nibbāna seems to be extremely long and we may wonder how we
could ever reach the goal. We should not be impatient and wish for a
result that is far off. Instead, we should consider what has to be done
at the present moment: the development of right understanding of the
nāma and rūpa appearing right now. In this way there will be conditions
eventually to attain nibbāna. 

@node Enlightenment
@chapter Enlightenment

One cannot attain enlightenment without having cultivated the right
conditions. We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book XI,
Kindred Sayings on Streamwinning, chapter I, paragraph 5, Sāriputta) about four
conditions for becoming a sotāpanna (streamwinner). The sutta states:

@quotation

Now the venerable Sāriputta went to see the Exalted One, and on coming
to him saluted him and sat down at one side. To the venerable Sāriputta
so seated the Exalted One said this: 

`` `A limb of
stream-winning! A limb of stream-winning!' is the
saying, Sāriputta. Tell me, Sāriputta, of what sort is a limb of
stream-winning.''

``Lord, association with the upright is
a limb of stream-winning. Hearing the good Dhamma is a limb of
stream-winning. Applying the mind is a limb of stream-winning.
Conforming to the Dhamma is a limb of
stream-winning.''

``Well said, Sāriputta! Well said,
Sāriputta! Indeed these are limbs of stream-winning.

Now again, Sāriputta, they say: `The stream! The
stream!' Of what sort is the stream,
Sāriputta?''

``The stream, lord, is just this ariyan
eightfold way, to wit: Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
concentration.''

``Well said, Sāriputta! Well said,
Sāriputta! The stream is just this ariyan eightfold way. 

Now again, Sāriputta, they say, `Streamwinner!
Streamwinner!' Of what sort is a streamwinner,
Sāriputta?''

``Whosoever, lord, is blessed with this
ariyan eightfold way  @minus{} such an one of such a name, of such and such a
clan, is called 

`Streamwinner'.''

@end quotation

The first condition, association with the righteous person, is most
important. It would not be possible to find the right path by oneself.
Only Buddhas have accumulated such wisdom that they can find the Path
by themselves, without the help of a teacher. Other people, however,
need the teachings of a Buddha in order to find the right path, because
ignorance has been accumulated for an endlessly long time. We need
association with the right person, the good friend in Dhamma, who can
point out to us the right path, because our defilements prevent us from
finding the right path. Our friend in Dhamma can encourage us to
develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa. 

The question may arise what one should do if one is not able to find the
right friend in Dhamma. Is reading the scriptures not a condition to
find the path leading to enlightenment? It is true that reading the
scriptures is also very helpful since they can encourage us to be
mindful of nāma and rūpa in daily life. We might, however, interpret
the teachings in the wrong way. It depends on conditions whether we
come into contact with the right person who can help us to understand
the teachings as well as the practice in accordance with the teachings.
Accumulated kusala kamma can be the condition for us to meet the right
person. 

When we have heard the Dhamma from the right person, we should
``apply the
mind''; this is the third condition.
We should not blindly follow the person who teaches us Dhamma, but we
should investigate the scriptures ourselves, ponder over the Dhamma,
and consider it carefully, in order to test the truth. 

The real test of the truth is the practice itself. Therefore, the fourth
condition is ``conforming to the
Dhamma'', which is the development of
the eightfold Path. By being mindful of the phenomena appearing through
the six doors we can find out ourselves whether it is true that these
phenomena are only nāma and rūpa, arising because of conditions. We can
investigate ourselves whether they are impermanent or permanent,
whether they are dukkha or happiness, whether they are non-self,
anattā, or
``self''.
We can find out through the practice itself whether we really
understand the teachings. If we practise in the wrong way we may
eventually find out that this does not lead to right understanding of
the realities of our daily life. Through the development of the
eightfold Path we will have more confidence (saddhā) in the
Buddha's teachings. We will have more confidence when
we experience that through right understanding of nāma and rūpa in
daily life there will be less clinging to
``self''.

Lokuttara cittas cannot arise without the cultivation of the right
conditions. Some people wish for an end to dukkha but they do not
develop understanding in daily life. They hope that one day lokuttara
cittas will arise. The Buddha pointed out that the realization of the
four noble Truths is difficult, and he said this, not in order to
discourage people, but in order to remind them not to be heedless. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book XII, Kindred Sayings
about the Truths, chapter V, paragraph 5, The keyhole) that, when the Buddha was
staying at Vesālī in Great Grove, Ānanda went into Vesālī on his rounds
for almsfood. In Vesālī he saw the Licchavi youths practising archery.
He then went to see the Buddha and said: 

@quotation

``Here, lord, robing myself in the
forenoon and taking bowl and outer robe I set out for Vesālī on my
begging rounds. Then, lord, I saw a number of Licchavi youths in the
gymnasium making practice at archery, shooting even from a distance
through a very small keyhole, and splitting an arrow, shot after shot,
with never a miss. And I said to myself, lord:
`Practised shots are these Licchavi youths! Well
practised shots indeed are these Licchavi youths, to be able even at a
distance to splinter an arrow through a very small keyhole, shot after
shot, with never a miss!'
''

``Now what think you, Ānanda? Which is
the harder, which is the harder task to compass: To shoot like that or
to pierce one strand of hair, seven times divided, with another
strand?''

``Why, lord, of course to split a hair
in such a way is the harder, much the harder
task.''

``Just so, Ānanda, they who penetrate
the meaning of: This is dukkha, this is the arising of dukkha, this is
the ceasing of dukkha, this is the practice that leads to the ceasing
of dukkha, pierce through something much harder to pierce. 

Wherefore, Ānanda, you must make an effort to realize: This is dukkha.
This is the arising of dukkha. This is the ceasing of dukkha. This is
the practice that leads to the ceasing of
dukkha.''

@end quotation

One might feel discouraged when reading this sutta; it would seem that
it is impossible to attain enlightenment. However, if one develops the
right Path, not the wrong Path, one will realize the four noble Truths;
one will attain enlightenment. The way to realize the four noble Truths
is to be mindful of the realities which appear now: seeing, visible
object, lobha, dosa or any other reality. We should not be discouraged
when we do not seem to make rapid progress. Most people cling to a
result and they become impatient when they do not notice an immediate
result; clinging to a result, however, is not helpful for the
development of wisdom, it is akusala.

Some people feel that the development of samatha can give a more
immediate result. Samatha, when it has been developed in the right way,
has tranquillity as its result. When jhāna is attained, lobha, dosa and
moha are temporarily eliminated. However, the attainment of jhāna is
extremely difficult and many conditions have to be cultivated. When one
is developing samatha, the hindrances may still arise: there will be
sensuous desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor, restlessness, worry and
doubt, until
``access-concentration''
or jhāna has been attained.

The aim of vipassanā is not tranquillity, but the eradication of wrong
view and eventually of all defilements. This goal may seem far off, but
each short moment of right awareness of nāma and rūpa is very fruitful;
it will help to eliminate clinging to the concept of self. While one is
mindful, there are no lobha, dosa or moha. Although tranquillity is not
the aim of vipassanā, at the moment of right mindfulness there is
kusala citta, and kusala citta is accompanied by calm. 

Vipassanā or insight is the development of right understanding of all
nāmas and rūpas which present themselves in daily life. Insight is
developed in different stages and in the course of its development the
characteristics of nāma and rūpa will be understood more clearly, and
their arising and falling away will be known through direct experience.
When insight has been developed stage by stage, the nāma and rūpa which
present themselves through the six doors can be clearly seen as
impermanent, dukkha and non-self, anattā. When paññā has been developed
to the degree that enlightenment can be attained, the unconditioned
reality, nibbāna, is directly experienced. The direct experience of
nibbāna is different from thinking about nibbāna. Nibbāna is directly
experienced during a mind-door process of cittas. Nibbāna cannot be
experienced through any of the five senses, it can be experienced only
through the mind-door. 

In the process during which enlightenment is attained, the
manodvārāvajjana-citta (the mind-door-adverting-consciousness) takes as
its object one of the three characteristics of reality: impermanence,
dukkha or anattā. This means that the reality presenting itself at that
moment is seen either as impermanent, or as dukkha or as anattā.
Anicca, dukkha and anattā are three aspects of the truth of conditioned
realities. Thus, if one sees one aspect, one also sees the other
aspects. However, the three characteristics cannot be experienced at
the same time, since citta can experience only one object at a time. It
depends on one's accumulations which of the three
characteristics is realized in the process of cittas during which
enlightenment is attained: one person views the reality appearing at
that moment as impermanent, another as dukkha, and another again as
non-self, anattā. The mano-dvārāvajjana-citta,
mind-door-adverting-consciousness, of that process adverts to one of
these three characteristics and is then succeeded by three or four
cittas which are not yet lokuttara cittas, but mahā-kusala cittas
(kusala cittas of the sense-sphere) accompanied by paññā @footnote{
See Visuddhimagga, chapter XXI, 129-136, and also “The Path of
Discrimination”  (Paṭisambhidāmagga) I, Treatise on Knowledge, chapter
VI-chapter X.}. The first mahā-kusala citta, which is called parikamma
or preparatory consciousness, still has the same object as the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta. Whichever of the three characteristics of
conditioned realities the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta adverted to, the
parikamma realizes that characteristic. The parikamma is succeeded by
the upacāra or proximity consciousness which still has the same object
as the mano-dvārāvajjana citta. This citta, the second mahā-kusala
citta in that process, is nearer to the moment the lokuttara cittas
will arise. The upacāra is succeeded by the anuloma, which means
conformity or adaptation. This citta still has the same object as the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta. Anuloma is succeeded by gotrabhū which is
sometimes translated as change of lineage. This citta is the last
kāmāvacara citta in that process. Gotrabhū is the last kāmāvacara citta
in a process before a citta of another plane of consciousness arises.
The other plane of consciousness may be rūpāvacara, arūpāvacara or
lokuttara. In samatha, gotrabhū is the last kāmāvacara citta before the
rūpa-jhānacitta or the arūpa-jhānacitta arises. In vipassanā, gotrabhū
is the last kāmāvacara citta of the non-ariyan before the lokuttara
citta arises and he becomes an ariyan. The object of the gotrabhū
arising before the lokuttara cittas is different from the object of
gotrabhū in samatha; the gotrabhū preceding the lokuttara cittas
experiences nibbāna. It is the first citta in that process which
experiences nibbāna, but it is not lokuttara citta. At the moment of
gotrabhū the person who is about to attain enlightenment is still a
non-ariyan. Gotrabhū does not eradicate defilements. Gotrabhū is
succeeded by the magga-citta which eradicates the defilements that are
to be eradicated at the stage of the sotāpanna. The magga-citta is the
first lokuttara citta in that process of cittas. When it has fallen
away it is succeeded by two (or three) phala-cittas
(fruition-consciousness) which are the result of the magga-citta and
which still have nibbāna as the object. As we have seen, the
magga-citta is succeeded immediately by its result, in the same process
of citta @footnote{See chapter 23}. The magga-citta cannot produce
vipāka in the form of rebirth, such as the kusala citta of the other
planes of consciousness. The phala-cittas are succeeded by
bhavanga-cittas @footnote{The names of the cittas arising in the
process during which enlightenment occurs are not only in the
commentaries but also in the scriptures, in the Path of Discrimination
and in the Book of Conditional Relations, the Paṭṭhāna. In the
Paṭṭhāna, the “Feeling Triplet”, under Proximity Condition, are
mentioned: anuloma, gotrabhū, magga-citta and two phala-cittas. Since
different names are given to these javana-cittas we can know their
number. The names parikamma and upacāra do not occur, but the
Visuddhimagga (XXI, 130) states that the three first mahā-kusala cittas
in that process can be called by one name: they can be called
repetition or preliminary work (parikamma), access (upacāra), or
conformity (anuloma). The process where enlightenment occurs is not an
ordinary process; it is a process with different types of citta
performing the function of javana. Still, this example makes it clearer
that the commentaries, when they stated that there are usually 7
javana-cittas in a process, based this on the canonical tradition (see
chapter 14).}. 

Some people do not need the moment of parikamma (preparatory
consciousness) and in that case three moments of phala-citta arise
instead of two moments. 

Summarising the cittas in the process during which enlightenment is
attained, they are the following:

@itemize

@item
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta

@item
parikamma (preparatory consciousness; 
for some people not necessary)

@item
upacāra (proximity consciousness)

@item
anuloma (conformity or adaptation)

@item
gotrabhū (change of lineage)

@item
magga-citta

@item
phala-citta (two or three moments, 
depending on the individual)

@end itemize

Nibbāna can be the object of kāmāvacara cittas which arise after the
lokuttara cittas have fallen away. Before someone becomes an ariyan
there can only be speculation about nibbāna. For the ariyan, however,
it is different. Since he has directly experienced nibbāna, he can
review his experience afterwards. We read in the Visuddhimagga (XXII,
19) that the person who attained enlightenment reviews, after the
lokuttara cittas have fallen away, the path, the fruition, the
defilements which have been abandoned, the defilements which are still
remaining and nibbāna. He reviews these things in different mind-door
processes of citta. 

Some people think that enlightenment could not occur in daily life, they
believe that it is necessary to be in a solitary place in order to
attain nibbāna. The development of vipassanā is the development of
right understanding of all realities occurring in daily life. When
paññā has been developed to the degree that enlightenment can be
attained, enlightenment can occur in the middle of
one's daily activities. As we have seen, the
attainment of enlightenment is only a few moments of citta which arise
and fall away within split seconds. 

We read in the Discourse to Dīghanakha (Middle Length Sayings II, no.
74) that the Buddha taught Dhamma to the wanderer Dīghanaka on
Vulture's Peak near Rājagaha. He taught him about the
getting rid of wrong views and about the impermanence of conditioned
realities. Sāriputta, who was an ariyan but had not yet attained
arahatship, was also present at the time of that discourse. We read:

@quotation

Now at that time the venerable Sāriputta was standing behind the Lord,
fanning the Lord. Then it occurred to the venerable Sāriputta:

``The Lord speaks to us of getting rid
of these things and those by means of super-knowledge, the Well-farer
speaks to us of casting out these things and those by means of
superknowledge''. While the venerable
Sāriputta was reflecting on this, his mind was freed from the cankers
without clinging. But to the wanderer Dīghanakha there arose the
stainless, spotless vision of dhamma, that whatever is of the nature to
arise all that is of the nature to stop@enddots{}

@end quotation

Sāriputta attained arahatship, but he did not go into solitude in order
to attain it; he was fanning the Buddha. Dīghanakha listened to the
Buddha and then became a sotāpanna. 

We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khandhā-vagga, Middle Fifty,
chapter 4, paragraph 89, Khema) that Khemaka, who was an anāgāmī, attained
arahatship while he was preaching and monks who were listening attained
arahatship as well. We read:

@quotation

Now when this teaching was thus expounded the hearts of as many as sixty
monks were utterly set free from the āsavas, and so was it also with
the heart of the venerable Khemaka@enddots{}

@end quotation

If one is on the right Path, paññā can be developed, no matter what the
circumstances are, even to the degree of enlightenment. People may
wonder whether it would be possible to notice it when a person attains
nibbāna. But can one see whether someone else is mindful or not
mindful? Who knows the cittas of other people? We cannot know when
someone else is mindful of nāma and rūpa or when he attains nibbāna. 

The question may arise whether all four stages of enlightenment (the
stages of the sotāpanna, the sakadāgāmī, the anāgāmī and the arahat)
can be attained in the course of one life. We read in the suttas about
disciples of the Buddha who attained the ariyan state but not yet
arahatship and realized arahatship later on in life. Ānanda, for
example, did not attain arahatship during the Buddha's
life, but he became an arahat after the Buddha had passed away, the
evening before the first great council was to start (the
``Illustrator of Ultimate
meaning'', commentary to the
``Mangala-sutta''
or ``Good Omen
Discourse'', Minor Readings, Khuddaka
Nikāya). 

The arahat has eradicated all defilements and thus he has reached the
end of the cycle of birth, old age, sickness and death; he has realized
the end of dukkha. The arahat will not be reborn, but he still has to
die and therefore one may ask whether he really has attained the end of
dukkha at the moment he realizes arahatship. Even the arahat is subject
to death, since he was born. He can also experience unpleasant results
of akusala kamma committed before he became an arahat. However, he has
no more defilements and cannot accumulate any more kamma which might
produce vipāka, he is really free from dukkha. 

In As it was said (Itivuttaka, The Twos, chapter II, paragraph 7, Khuddaka
Nikāya) two ``conditions @footnote{
dhātu, which literally means element.} of
nibbāna'' are explained. In this
sutta Sa-upādi-sesa-nibbāna @footnote{Upādi: substratum of life, the
five khandhas.  Sa: with, sesa: remaining. }, one
``condition''
of nibbāna, pertains to the arahat who has eradicated all defilements
but for whom the five khandhas are still remaining. For the arahat who
has not finally passed away yet, there are still citta, cetasika and
rūpa arising and falling away. An-upādi-sesa-nibbāna @footnote{
An-upādi-sesa: without the khandhas remaining. }, the other
``condition''
of nibbāna, pertains to the arahat who has finally passed away; for him
there are no khandhas remaining, there are no longer citta, cetasika
and rūpa arising and falling away. 

We read in the verse of this sutta, after the explanation:

@example

These two nibbāna-states are shown by him
Who sees, who is such and unattached.
One state is that in this same life possessed
With base remaining, though becoming's stream
Be cut off. While the state without a base
Belongs to the future, wherein all
Becomings utterly do come to cease.
They who, by knowing this state uncompounded @footnote{asaṅkhata, the
unconditioned reality.} 
Have heart's release, by cutting off the stream,
They who have reached the core of dhamma, glad
To end, such have abandoned all becomings.

@end example

When someone has become an arahat there will be no more rebirth for him.
When someone has attained enlightenment to the stage of the sotāpanna,
he has become an ariyan, but he has not reached the end of rebirth. The
sotāpanna will be reborn, but not more than seven times; thus,
eventually there will be an end to rebirth for him. If we do not
develop vipassanā, the number of rebirths will be endless. It was out
of compassion that the Buddha spoke about the dangers of rebirth; he
wanted to encourage people to develop right understanding. We read in
the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book XII, Kindred Sayings about the
Truths, chapter V, paragraph 6, Gross darkness) that the Buddha said to the
monks:

@quotation

``Monks, there is a darkness of
interstellar space, impenetrable gloom, such a murk of darkness as
cannot enjoy the splendour of this moon and sun, though they be of such
mighty magic power and majesty.''

At these words a certain monk said to the Exalted One:

``Lord, that must be a mighty darkness,
a mighty darkness indeed! Pray, lord, is there any other darkness
greater and more fearsome than
that?''

``There is indeed, monk, another
darkness, greater and more fearsome. And what is that other darkness?

Monk, whatsoever recluses or brahmins understand not, as it really is,
the meaning of: This is dukkha, this is the arising of dukkha, this is
the ceasing of dukkha, this is the practice that leads to the ceasing
of dukkha, such take delight in the activities which conduce to
rebirth. Thus taking delight they compose a compound of activities
which conduce to rebirth. Thus composing a compound of activities they
fall down into the darkness of rebirth, into the darkness of old age
and death, of sorrow, grief, woe, lamentation and despair. They are not
released from birth, old age and death, from sorrow, grief, woe,
lamentation and despair. They are not released from dukkha, I declare.

But, monk, those recluses or brahmins who do understand as it really is,
the meaning of: This is dukkha, this is the arising of dukkha, this is
the ceasing of dukkha, this is the practice that leads to the ceasing
of dukkha, such take not delight in the activities which conduce to
rebirth@dots{}They are released from dukkha, I declare.

Wherefore, monk, an effort must be made to realize: This is dukkha. This
is the arising of dukkha. This is the ceasing of dukkha. This is the
practice that leads to the ceasing of
dukkha.'' 

@end quotation

@node Glossary
@unnumbered Glossary

@table @code

@item 
@item abhidhamma 
the higher teachings of Buddhism, teachings on ultimate 
realities.   

@item Abhidhammattha Sangaha
an Encyclopedia of the Abhidhamma, written by Anuruddha between the 8th and the 12th century A.D.   

@item abhiññā
supernormal powers.   

@item adosa
non aversion.   

@item ahetuka cittas
not accompanied by “beautiful roots” or unwholesome roots.   

@item ākāsānañcāyatana
sphere of boundless space, the meditation subject of the first immaterial jhānacitta.
 
@item akiñcaññāyatana
sphere of nothingness, the meditation subject of the third immaterial jhānacitta.   

@item  akusala
unwholesome, unskilful.   

@item  alobha
non attachment, generosity.   

@item  amoha
wisdom or understanding.   

@item  anāgāmī
non-returner, person who has reached the third stage of enlightenment, he has no aversion (dosa).   

@item  anattā
not self.   

@item  anicca
impermanence.   

@item  anuloma
conformity or adaptation.   

@item anusaya
latent tendency or proclivity.   

@item anupādisesa nibbāna
final nibbāna, without the khandhas (aggregates or
 groups of existence) remaining, at the death of an arahat.   

@item apo-dhātu
element of water or cohesion.    

@item  appanā
absorption.    

@item  arahat
noble person who has attained the fourth and last stage of enlightenment.    

@item  ārammaṇa
object which is known by consciousness.    

@item  ariyan
noble person who has attained enlightenment.    

@item  arūpa-bhūmi
plane of arūpa jhānacitta.    

@item  arūpa-brahma
plane plane of existence attained as a result of arūpa-jhāna. 
 There are no sense impressions, no rūpa experienced in this realm.    

@item  arūpa-jhāna
immaterial absorption.    

@item  asaṅkhārika
unprompted, not induced, either by oneself or by someone else.    

@item  asaṅkhata dhamma
unconditioned reality, nibbāna. 

@item āsavas
influxes or intoxicants, group of defilements .    

@item  asobhana
not beautiful, not accompanied by beautiful roots.    

@item  asubha
foul.    

@item  asura
demon, being of one of the unhappy planes of existence.
 
@item atīta-bhavanga
past life-continuum, arising and falling away shortly before the
 start of a process of cittas experiencing an object through one of
 the sense-doors.    

@item  Atthasālinī
The Expositor, a commentary to the first book of the Abhidhamma
 Piṭaka.    

@item  āvajjana
adverting of consciousness to the object which has impinged on one
 of the six doors.    

@item  avijjā
ignorance.    

@item  ayoniso manasikāra
unwise attention to an object.    

@item  bhāvanā
mental development, comprising the development of calm and the 
 development of insight.    

@item  bhavanga
life-continuum.    

@item  bhavanga calana
vibrating bhavanga arising shortly before a process of cittas
 experiencing an object through one of the six doors.    

@item  bhavangupaccheda
arrest bhavanga, last bhavanga-citta before a process of 
 cittas starts.    

@item  bhikkhu
monk.    

@item  bhikkhunī
nun.   

@item bhūmi
plane of existence or plane of citta.   

@item brahma-vihāras
the four divine abidings, meditation subjects which are: loving
 kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, equanimity.   

@item Buddha
a fully enlightened person who has discovered the truth all 
 by himself, without the aid of a teacher and can proclaim Dhamma to 
 the world. 
 
@item Buddhaghosa
commentator on the Tipiṭaka, author of the Visuddhimagga in
 5 A.D.   

@item cakkhu
eye.  

@item cakkhu-dhātu
eye element.   

@item cakkhu-dvāra
eyedoor.   

@item cakkhu-dvārāvajjana-citta
eye-door-adverting-consciousness.   

@item cakkhuppasāda rūpa
rūpa which is the organ of eyesense, capable of receiving visible object.   

@item cakkhu-viññāṇa
seeing-consciousness.   

@item cetanā
volition or intention.   

@item cetasika
mental factor arising with consciousness.   

@item citta
consciousness, the reality which knows or cognizes an object.   

@item cuti-citta
dying-consciousness.   

@item dāna
generosity, giving.   

@item dassana-kicca
function of seeing.   

@item dhamma
reality, truth, the teachings.   

@item dhamma-dhātu
element of dhammas, realities, comprising cetasikas, subtle
 rūpas, nibbāna.   

@item dhammārammaṇa
all objects other than the sense objects which can be experienced through the five 
sense-doors, thus, objects which can be experienced only through the mind-door. 
 
@item Dhammasangaṇi
the first book of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka.   

@item Dhātukathā
Discussion on the Elements, the third book of the Abhidhamma.   

@item diṭṭhi
wrong view, distorted view of realities.   

@item diṭṭhigata sampayutta
accompanied by wrong view.   

@item domanassa
unpleasant feeling.  

@item dosa
aversion or ill will.   

@item dosa-mūla-citta
citta (consciousness) rooted in aversion.   

@item dukkha
suffering, unsatisfactoriness of conditioned realities.   

@item dukkha vedanā
painful feeling or unpleasant feeling.   

@item dvāra
doorway through which an object is experienced, the five sense-doors or
 the mind door.   

@item dvi-pañca-viññāṇa
the five pairs of sense-cognitions, which are seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting
 and body-consciousness. Of each pair 
 one is kusala vipāka and one akusala vipāka.   

@item ekaggatā
concentration, one-pointedness, a cetasika which has the function 
 to focus on one object.   

@item ganthas
bonds, a group of defilements.   

@item ghāna-dhātu
nose element.   

@item ghānappasāda rūpa
rūpa which is the organ of smelling sense, capable of 
 receiving odour.   

@item ghāna-viññāṇa
smelling-consciousness.   

@item ghāyana-kicca
function of smelling.   

@item gotrabhū
change of lineage, the last citta of the sense-sphere before jhāna,
 absorption, is attained, or enlightenment is attained.   

@item hadaya-vatthu
heart-base, rūpa which is the plane of origin of the cittas other
 than the sense-cognitions.   

@item hasituppāda-citta
smile producing consciousness of an arahat.   

@item hetu
root, which conditions citta to be “beautiful” or unwholesome.   

@item indriya
faculty. Some are rūpas such as the sense organs, some are nāmas
 such as feeling. Five ’spiritual faculties’ are wholesome 
 faculties which should be cultivated, namely: confidence, 
 energy, awareness, concentration and wisdom.
 
@item issā
envy.   

@item jāti
birth, nature, class (of cittas).   

@item javana-citta
cittas which ’run through the object’, kusala citta or akusala citta
 in the case of non-arahats.   

@item jhāna
absorption which can be attained through the development of calm.   

@item jhāna-factors
cetasikas which have to be cultivated for the attainment of 
 jhāna: vitakka, vicāra, pīti, sukha, samādhi.   

@item jivhā-dhātu
tongue element.   

@item jivhāppasāda rūpa
rūpa which is the organ of tasting sense, capable of 
 receiving flavour.   

@item jivhā-viññāṇa
tasting-consciousness.   

@item kāma
sensual enjoyment or the five sense objects.   

@item kāma-bhūmi
sensuous plane of existence.   

@item kāmacchandha
sensuous desire.   

@item kāma-sobhana cittas
beautiful cittas of the sense sphere.   

@item kāmāvacara cittas
cittas of the sense sphere.   

@item kamma
intention or volition; deed motivated by volition.   

@item kammapatha
course of action performed through body, speech or mind which
 can be wholesome or unwholesome.   

@item karuṇā
compassion.   

@item kasiṇa
disk, used as an object for the development of calm.   

@item kāya
body. It can also stand for the “mental body”, the cetasikas.   

@item kāya dhātu
the element of bodysense.  

@item kāyappasāda rūpa
bodysense, the rūpa which is capable of receiving tangible
 object. It is all over the body, inside or outside.   

@item kāya-viññatti
bodily intimation, such as gestures, facial expression, etc.   

@item kāya-viññāṇa
body-consciousness.   

@item khandhas
aggregates of conditioned realities classified as five groups: physical
 phenomena, feelings, perception or remembrance, activities or
 formations (cetasikas other than feeling or perception), consciousness.   

@item kicca
function.   

@item kilesa
defilements.   

@item kiriya citta
inoperative citta, neither cause nor result.   

@item kukkucca
regret or worry.   

@item kusala citta
wholesome consciousness.   

@item kusala kamma
a good deed.   

@item kusala
wholesome, skillful.   

@item lobha
attachment, greed.   

@item lobha-mūla-citta
consciousness rooted in attachment.   

@item lokiya citta
citta which is mundane, not experiencing nibbāna.   

@item lokuttara citta
supramundane citta which experiences nibbāna.   

@item lokuttara dhammas
the unconditioned dhamma which is nibbāna and the
 cittas which experience nibbāna.   

@item macchariya
stinginess.   

@item magga
path (eightfold Path).  

@item magga-citta
path consciousness, supramundane citta which experiences 
 nibbāna and eradicates defilements.   

@item mahā-bhūta-rūpas
the rūpas which are the four great elements of “earth” or
 solidity, “water ” or cohesion, “fire” or temperature, and 
 “wind” or motion.   

@item mahā-kiriyacitta
inoperative sense-sphere citta of the arahat, accompanied by
 “beautiful” roots.   

@item mahā-kusala citta
wholesome citta of the sense sphere.   

@item mahā-vipākacitta
citta of the sense sphere which is result, accompanied by
 “beautiful” roots.   

@item manāyatana
mind-base, including all cittas.   

@item mano
mind, citta, consciousness.   

@item mano-dhātu
mind-element, comprising the five-sense-door adverting-
 consciousness, and the two types of receiving-consciousness.   

@item mano-dvārāvajjana-citta
mind-door-adverting-consciousness.   

@item mano-dvāra-vīthi-cittas
cittas arising in a mind-door process.   

@item mano-viññāṇa-dhātu
mind-consciousness element, comprising all cittas other
 than the sense-cognitions (seeing, etc.) and mind-element.   

@item māra
“the evil one”—all that leads to dukkha   

@item mettā
loving kindness.   

@item middha
torpor or languor.   

@item moha
ignorance. 
moha-mūla-citta citta rooted in ignorance.   

@item muditā
sympathetic joy.  

@item nāma
mental phenomena, including those which are conditioned and also the
 unconditioned nāma which is nibbāna.   

@item natthika diṭṭhi
wrong view of annihilation, assumption that there is no result of 
 kamma.   

@item n’eva-saññā-n’āsaññāyatana
sphere of neither perception nor non-perception,
 the meditation subject of the fourth immaterial jhāna.   

@item nibbāna
the unconditioned reality, the reality which does not arise and fall 
 away.The destruction of lust, hatred and delusion. The deathless. 
 The end of suffering.   

@item nimitta
mental image one can acquire of a meditation subject in tranquil 
 meditation.   

@item nirodha-samāpatti
attainment of cessation of consciousness.   

@item nīvaraṇa
hindrances, a group of defilements.   

@item ñāṇa
wisdom, insight.   

@item ojā
the rūpa which is nutrition.   

@item oḷārika rūpas
gross rūpas (sense objects and sense organs).   

@item Pacceka Buddha
Silent Buddha, an enlightened one who has found the truth
 by himself but does not proclaim Dhamma to the world.   

@item paṭibhāga nimitta
counterpart image, more perfected mental image of a 
 meditation subject, acquired in tranquil meditation.   

@item paṭigha
aversion or ill will.   

@item Paṭṭhāna
Conditional Relations, the seventh book of the Abhidhamma.   

@item paṭisandhi citta
rebirth consciousness.   

@item Pāli
the language of the Buddhist teachings.  

@item pañcadvārāvajjana-citta
five-sense-door-adverting-consciousness.  

@item pañcaviññāṇa
(or dvi-pañcaviññāṇa), the sense cognitions (seeing etc.) of
 which there are five pairs.   

@item paññā
wisdom or understanding.   

@item paññatti
concepts, conventional terms.   

@item paramattha dhamma
truth in the absolute sense: mental and physical phenomena,
 each with their own characteristic.

@item parikamma
preparatory consciousness, the first javana citta arising in the
 process during which absorption or enlightenment is attained.   

@item pasāda-rūpas
rūpas which are capable of receiving sense-objects such as
 visible object, sound, taste, etc. 
peta ghost.   

@item phala-citta
fruition consciousness experiencing nibbāna. It is result of magga-
 citta, path-consciousness.   

@item phassa
contact.   

@item phoṭṭhabbārammaṇa
tangible object, experienced through bodysense.   

@item phusanakicca
function of experiencing tangible object.   

@item pīti
joy, rapture, enthusiasm.   

@item Puggalapaññatti
Designation of Human Types, the fourth book of the 
 Abhidhamma.   

@item puthujjana
“worldling”, a person who has not attained enlightenment.   

@item Rāhula
the Buddha’s son.   

@item rasārammaṇa
object of flavour.  

@item rūpārammaṇa
visible object.   

@item rūpa
physical phenomena, realities which do not experience anything.   

@item rūpa-brahma
plane rūpa-bhūmi, fine material realm of existence attained as a
 result of rūpa-jhāna.   

@item rūpa-jhāna
fine material absorption, developed with a meditation subject
 which is still dependant on materiality.   

@item rūpa-khandha
aggregate or group of all physical phenomena (rūpas).   

@item rūpāvacara cittas
rūpa-jhānacittas, consciousness of the fine-material sphere.   

@item saddārammaṇa
sound.   

@item saddhā
confidence.   

@item sahagata
accompanied by.   

@item sahetuka
accompanied by roots.   

@item sakadāgāmī
once-returner, a noble person who has attained the second stage
 of enlightenment. 
@item samādhi
concentration or one-pointedness, ekaggatā cetasika.   

@item samatha
the development of calm.   

@item sammā
right.   

@item sampaṭicchana-citta
receiving-consciousness.   

@item sampayutta
associated with.   

@item Sangha
community of monks and nuns. As one of the triple Gems it means the
 community of those people who have attained enlightenment.   

@item saṅkhāra dhammas
conditioned dhammas that arise together depending on
 each other.  

@item saṅkhata dhamma
what has arisen because of conditions.   

@item saṅkhāra-kkhandha
all cetasikas (mental factors) except feeling and memory.  

@item saññā
memory, remembrance or “perception”.   

@item saññā-kkhandha
memory classified as one of the five khandhas.   

@item santīraṇa-citta
investigating-consciousness.   

@item Sāriputta
chief disciple of Buddha.   

@item sasaṅkhārika
prompted, induced, instigated, either by oneself or someone
 else.   

@item sati
mindfulness or awareness: non-forgetfulness of what is wholesome, or
 non-forgetfulness of realities which appear.   

@item satipaṭṭhāna sutta
Middle Length Sayings 1, number 10, also Dīgha Nikāya, 
 Dialogues, no. 22.   

@item satipaṭṭhāna
applications of mindfulness. It can mean the cetasika sati which 
 is aware of realities or the objects of mindfulness which are classified as four applications of mindfulness: Body, Feeling Citta,
 Dhamma. Or it can mean the development of direct understanding of realities through awareness.

@item sa-upadi-sesa nibbāna
the attainment of nibbāna with the khandhas remaining
 by the arahat, thus not final nibbāna at death of an arahat.   

@item sāyana-kicca
function of tasting.   

@item savana-kicca
function of hearing.   

@item sīla
morality in action or speech, virtue.   

@item sīlabbatupādāna
wrong practice, which is clinging to certain rules (“rites and
 rituals”) in one’s practice.   

@item sobhana-hetus
beautiful roots.  

@item sobhana kiriya cittas
kiriyacittas accompanied by sobhana (beautiful) roots.   

@item sobhana(citta and cetasika)
beautiful, accompanied by beautiful roots.   

@item somanassa
happy feeling.   

@item sota-dhātu
element of earsense.   

@item sota-dvārāvajjana-citta
ear-door-adverting-consciousness.   

@item sota-dvāra-vīthi-cittas
ear-door process cittas.   

@item sotāpanna
person who has attained the first stage of enlightenment, and who
 has eradicated wrong view of realities.   

@item sota-viññāṇa
hearing-consciousness.   

@item sukha
happy, pleasant.   

@item sukha-vedanā
pleasant feeling.   

@item sukhuma
subtle.   

@item sutta
part of the scriptures containing dialogues at different places on different
 occasions.   

@item suttanta
a sutta text. 

@item tadālambana
retention or registering, last citta of a complete process of the
 sense-sphere.   

@item tadārammaṇa
as above.   

@item Tathāgata
literally “thus gone”, epithet of the Buddha.   

@item tatramajjhattatā
equanimity or evenmindedness.   

@item tejo-dhātu
element of fire or heat.   

@item Theravāda Buddhism
`Doctrine of the Elders', the oldest tradition of
 Buddhism.  

@item thīna
sloth.   

@item Tipiṭaka
the teachings of the Buddha contained in the Vinaya, the Suttanta and
 the Abhidhamma.   

@item uddhacca
restlessness.   

@item Udāna
Verses of Uplift from the Minor Anthologies.   

@item upacāra
access or proximity consciousness, the second javana-citta in the
 process in which absorption or enlightenment is attained.   

@item upacāra-samādhi
access-concentration.   

@item upādā-rūpa
“derived rūpas” the rūpas other than the four Great Elements.   

@item upādāna
clinging.   

@item upādāna-kkhandhas
khandhas of clinging.   

@item upekkhā
indifferent feeling. It can stand for evenmindedness or equanimity
 and then it is not feeling.   

@item vacīviññatti
the rūpa which is speech intimation.   

@item vatthu
base, physical base of citta.   

@item vāyo-dhātu
element of wind or motion.   

@item vedanā
feeling.   

@item vedanā-kkhandha
group of all feelings.   

@item Vibhaṅga
“Book of Analysis”, second book of the Abhidhamma.   

@item vicāra
sustained thinking or discursive thinking.   

@item vicikicchā
doubt.   

@item vinaya
Book of Discipline for the monks.  

@item viññāṇa
consciousness, citta.   

@item viññāṇa-dhātu
element of consciousness, comprising all cittas.   

@item viññāṇa-kkhandha
group of all cittas (consciousness).   

@item viññāṇañcāyatana
sphere of boundless consciousness, meditation subject for
 the second stage of immaterial jhāna.   

@item vipākacitta
citta which is the result of a wholesome deed (kusala kamma) or
 an unwholesome deed (akusala kamma). It can arise as rebirth-
 consciousness, or during life as the experience of pleasant or
 unpleasant objects through the senses, such as seeing, hearing, etc.   

@item vipassanā
wisdom which sees realities as they are.   

@item vippayutta
dissociated from.   

@item viriya
energy.   

@item visaṇkāra dhamma
unconditioned dhamma, nibbāna.   

@item Visuddhimagga
an Encyclopaedia of the Buddha’s teachings, written by Buddhaghosa
 in the fifth century A.D.   

@item vitakka
applied thinking.   

@item vīthi-cittas
cittas arising in a process.   

@item vīthimutta-cittas
process freed cittas, cittas which do not arise within a
 process.   

@item votthapana-citta
determining consciousness.   

@item vyāpāda
ill-will.   

@item Yamaka
the Book of Pairs, the sixth book of the Abhidhamma.   

@item yoniso manasikāra
wise attention to the object.  




@end table

@unnumbered Books


@section Books written by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 
@item 
@emph{The Buddha's Path} An Introduction to the doctrine of Theravada
Buddhism for those who have no previous knowledge. The four noble
Truths - suffering - the origin of suffering - the cessation of suffering
- and the way leading to the end of suffering - are explained as a
philosophy and a practical guide which can be followed in today's world.
@item 
@emph{Buddhism in Daily Life} A general introduction to the main ideas
of Theravada Buddhism.The purpose of this book is to help the reader
gain insight into the Buddhist scriptures and the way in which the
teachings can be used to benefit both ourselves and others in everyday
life.

@item 
@emph{The World in the Buddhist Sense} The purpose of this book is to
show that the Buddha's Path to true understanding has to be developed
in daily life.
@item 
@emph{Cetasikas} Cetasika means 'belonging to the mind'. It is a mental
factor which accompanies consciousness (citta) and experiences an
object. There are 52 cetasikas. This book gives an outline of each
of these 52 cetasikas and shows the relationship they have with each
other.
@item 
@emph{The Buddhist Teaching on Physical Phenomena} A general introduction
to physical phenomena and the way they are related to each other and
to mental phenomena. The purpose of this book is to show that the
study of both mental phenomena and physical phenomena is indispensable
for the development of the eightfold Path. 

@item
@emph{The Conditionality of Life} By Nina van Gorkom


This book is an introduction to the seventh book of the Abhidhamma,
that deals with the conditionality of life. It explains the deep underlying
motives for all actions through body, speech and mind and shows that these are
dependent on conditions and cannot be controlled by a ‘self’. This book is suitable for those who have already made a study of
the Buddha’s teachings. 
@end itemize

@section Books translated by Nina van Gorkom

@itemize @minus 
@item 
@emph{Mettā: Loving kindness in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. An introduction to the basic
Buddhist teachings of mettā, loving kindness, and its practical application
in todays world.
@item 
@emph{Taking Refuge in Buddhism} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. Taking Refuge in Buddhism is an introduction
to the development of insight meditation.
@item 
@emph{A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. A Survey of Paramattha Dhammas
is a guide to the development of the Buddha's path of wisdom, covering
all aspects of human life and human behaviour, good and bad. This
study explains that right understanding is indispensable for mental
development, the development of calm as well as the development of
insight.
@item 
@emph{The Perfections Leading to Enlightenment} by Sujin Boriharnwanaket. The Perfections is a
study of the ten good qualities: generosity, morality, renunciation,
wisdom, energy, patience, truthfulness, determination, loving-kindness,
and equanimity.


@end itemize
These and other articles can be seen at www.zolag.co.uk or www.scribd.com
(search for zolag).




@bye

