


















 














First Edition
April 2000
zolag
46 Fircroft Road
Tooting Bec
London
SW17 7PS
Find us on the web at
www.zolag.co.uk

ISBN 1 897633 20 3







© 2000 Sujin Boriharnwanaket.
All rights reserved.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data.
A CIP record for this book is available from the
British Library.

Printed in Great Britain by:
Biddles Ltd., Guildford, and King's Lynn.

Front cover picture: 
Battersea Park Peace Pagoda, London.


Contents


Preface	7
Introduction	11
Chapter 1	17
	Mental Phenomena and Physical Phenomena
Chapter 2	27
	Confidence in the Buddha's Teachings
Chapter 3	37
	The Meaning of Dhamma
Chapter 4	43
	Listening to the Dhamma
Chapter 5	55
	Different Degrees of Understanding
Chapter 6	67
	The Eightfold Path
Chapter 7	77
	The Right Way and the Wrong Way
Chapter 8	89
	The Natural Way to develop Understanding
Glossary	99





From the sponsor:

Dedicated to the memory of 
John Kirkpatrick (1921-1999)






Preface


This book is a compilation of Discussions on Buddhism Ms Sujin had 
with Cambodians in 1992 and 1993, in Cambodia and in Nakorn Nåyok, 
near the border between Thailand and Cambodia. The teacher of the 
group of Cambodians, Mr Buth Sawong, had learnt Thai in seven years in 
order to follow Ms Sujin's radio program on Buddhism which can be 
heard also in Cambodia. Several years ago a blind friend had 
encouraged him to listen to Ms Sujin. During the day Mr Buth Sawong 
studied Buddhism and in the evening he explained to others what he had 
learnt about the development of right understanding of mental 
phenomena and physical phenomena in daily life. People generally 
thought that they had to sit and be tranquil in order to develop 
wisdom as taught by the Buddha; what they learnt from Ms Sujin about 
the development of understanding in their daily lives was quite new to 
them. When I met Mr Buth Sawong in Thailand he said that he had never 
heard before such teaching of the development of right understanding. 
He was very happy to learn that this development was to be done in 
daily life. The Thais helped Mr Buth Sawong with a new radio station 
and now he has his own program on two different stations. He also 
translated my "Abhidhamma in Daily Life" into Cambodian. 
One of the members of his group is a magician famous all over 
Cambodia. He also entertained us with magic tricks when he was in 
Thailand. More extraordinary is that he, after each magic show, gives 
a lecture on Buddhism, explaining that his tricks are an illusion and 
that illusion is different from reality. He said that people should 
not only have enjoyment in what is only an illusion, but that they 
should also learn more about realities in their daily lives. This is 
the Middle Way the Buddha taught. People do not have to force 
themselves to follow difficult ascetic practices, they can develop 
understanding of the phenomena which naturally appear in their daily 
lives, including defilements. 
The Buddha taught the development of right understanding of all that 
is real, of all the phenomena of our life as they appear through the 
five senses and the mind. This understanding can eventually lead to 
the eradication of all faults and vices. The development of insight or 
right understanding was the subject of the discussions on Buddhism 
held in Cambodia. Ms Sujin stressed time and again that the conditions 
for the growth of understanding are above all listening to the Dhamma 
and considering what one has heard. By listening and considering, the 
right conditions are accumulated for the arising of direct awareness 
of realities and at such moments direct understanding of them can be 
developed. The Buddha taught that there is no person, no being, no 
self. What we take for our mind and our body are only different mental 
phenomena and physical phenomena which arise because of conditions and 
then fall away. All realities and thus also mindfulness and 
understanding are non-self. There is nobody who can control the 
arising of awareness and understanding; there is no particular method 
which has to be followed for the development of right understanding. 
Theoretical understanding of realities acquired by listening and 
considering is the foundation for direct understanding of them.
This book consists of questions and answers. At each meeting there was 
an interpreter who translated Ms Sujin's words into Cambodian and also 
summarized the questions of the listeners. In chapter 6 we read about 
Ms Sujin's personal life and about the way she started to be 
interested in the Buddhist teachings. She mentions the lack of Thai 
translations of the scriptures and commentaries before 1957. When 
there were more translations available she used more quotations from 
the scriptures during her lectures and thereby greatly encouraged 
people to read the scriptures themselves. In this way they would be 
guided by the teachings themselves and not follow blindly other 
people. Moreover, Ms Sujin has done a great deal to promote the 
translations of the old commentaries to the Suttas into Thai. In the 
Thai editions of the Suttas today each sutta is followed by its 
commentary. 
I hope the reader will be inspired when reading about the development 
of right understanding in daily life, just as our Cambodian friends 
were inspired. Mr Buth Sawong showed his great confidence and deep 
respect to Ms Sujin's guidance, because he considered her as a mother, 
as someone who gave him a new life. If one learns to apply the 
Buddha's teachings it is true that a new life begins. With my deepest 
appreciation of Ms Sujin's guidance and with great pleasure I offer 
the translation of this book on the development of right understanding 
to the English readers. I also wish to acknowledge my appreciation to 
the "Dhamma Study and Propagation Foundation"; to the sponsor of the 
printing of this edition, Robert Kirkpatrick: and to the publisher 
Alan Weller who have made possible the publication of this book.
The quotations in English from the Suttas are mostly taken from the 
texts of the Pali Text Society (73 Lime Walk, Headington, Oxford, OX 
37 AD, England). 
I have added footnotes to the text in order to make the reading of 
this book easier. I shall now in my Introduction give an explanation 
and summary of some notions and terms of the Buddhist teachings in 
order to help those who may not be familiar with them. 



Introduction 

For the development of understanding of the phenomena of our life in 
ourselves and around ourselves, it is essential to know the difference 
between what is real in the conventional sense and what is real in the 
absolute or ultimate sense. Before we learnt about the Buddhist 
teachings we only knew conventional realities such as person, world, 
animal or tree. The Buddha taught about absolute or ultimate 
realities, in Påli paramattha dhammas. Ultimate realities or as they 
often are referred to in this book, dhammas, have each their own 
characteristic, their own function, and they are true for everybody. 
We are used to thinking of mind and body, but what we take for mind 
are in reality different moments of consciousness, cittas, which 
change all the time. Citta is a mental phenomenon or nåma, it 
experiences an object. What we take for body are different physical 
phenomena, rúpas, which arise and fall away. Rúpa does not experience 
anything. Nåma and rúpa are absolute realities, each with their own 
unalterable characteristic. Seeing, for example, is nåma, it 
experiences visible object. It has its own characteristic which cannot 
be changed: seeing is always seeing, for everybody, no matter how we 
name it. The names of realities can be changed but their 
characteristics are unalterable. After having seen visible object we 
think of the shape and form of a person or a thing, but that is not 
seeing, it is thinking of a concept which is real in conventional 
sense, not in the absolute sense. In our life there are cittas which 
are seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, or experiencing tangible 
object and there are also cittas which on account of such experiences 
think of concepts. This is our daily life and through the Buddha's 
teachings we will be less deluded about our life. We will learn what 
is real in the absolute sense and what is only a conventional reality 
or concept.
There is only one citta at a time which arises and falls away, to be 
succeeded by the next citta. Each citta experiences an object. Seeing 
is a citta experiencing visible object through the eyesense, hearing 
is another type of citta experiencing sound through the earsense. 
Different cittas experience objects through the six doorways, namely, 
through the five senses and the mind. Cittas are variegated: some 
cittas are wholesome, kusala, some are unwholesome, akusala, and some 
are neither kusala nor akusala. There is one citta arising at a time, 
but each citta is accompanied by several mental factors, cetasikas, 
which each perform their own function while they assist the citta in 
knowing the object. Some cetasikas such as feeling or remembrance, 
saññå, accompany each citta, whereas other types of cetasikas 
accompany only particular types of citta. Attachment, lobha, aversion, 
dosa, and ignorance, moha, are akusala cetasikas which accompany only 
akusala cittas. Non-attachment, alobha, non-aversion, adosa, and 
wisdom, amoha or paññå, are sobhana cetasikas, beautiful cetasikas, 
which can accompany only sobhana cittas. 
Citta and cetasika, which are both mental phenomena, nåma, arise 
because of their appropriate conditions. Wholesome qualities and 
unwholesome qualities which arose in the past can condition the 
arising of such qualities at present. Since our life is an unbroken 
series of cittas, succeeding one another, wholesome qualities and 
unwholesome qualities can be accumulated from one moment to the next 
moment, and thus there are conditions for their arising at the present 
time. 
Some cittas are results of akusala kamma and kusala kamma, they are 
vipåkacittas. Kamma is intention or volition. When there is 
unwholesome volition it can motivate an unwholesome deed which can 
bring an unpleasant result later on, and when there is wholesome 
volition it can motivate a wholesome deed which can bring a pleasant 
result later on. Akusala kamma and kusala kamma are accumulated from 
one moment of citta to the next moment, and thus they can produce 
results later on. Kamma produces result in the form of 
rebirth-consciousness, or, in the course of life, in the form of 
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and the experience of tangible 
object through the bodysense. These vipåkacittas experience pleasant 
objects or unpleasant objects, depending on the kamma which produces 
them. 
Cittas which experience objects through the six doors arise in a 
process of cittas. When, for example, hearing arises, it occurs within 
a series or process of cittas, all of which experience sound. Only 
hearing-consciousness hears, but the other cittas within that process, 
which is called the ear-door process, perform each their own function. 
Hearing-consciousness is vipåkacitta, it merely hears the sound, it 
neither likes it nor dislikes it. After hearing-consciousness has 
fallen away there are, within that process, akusala cittas or kusala 
cittas which experience the sound with unwholesomeness or with 
wholesomeness. There can be akusala cittas with attachment or with 
aversion towards the sound, or there can be kusala cittas. There are 
processes of cittas experiencing an object through the eye-door, the 
ear-door, the nose-door, the tongue-door, the body-door and the 
mind-door. After the cittas of a sense-door process have fallen away, 
the object is experienced by cittas arising in a mind-door process, 
and after that process has been completed there can be other mind-door 
processes of cittas which think of concepts. Cittas arise and fall 
away in succession so rapidly that it seems that cittas such as seeing 
and thinking of what is seen occur at the same time, but in reality 
there are different types of citta arising in different processes. We 
believe, for example, that we see a table, but in reality there is a 
process of cittas experiencing visible object through the eyesense, 
and then there is a process of cittas experiencing visible object 
through the mind-door, and later on there are other mind-door 
processes of cittas which think of the concept of table. For the 
development of right understanding it is important to know that there 
are different cittas which experience different objects through the 
six doorways. 
Citta and cetasika are mental phenomena, in Påli: nåma. Nåma 
experiences an object whereas physical phenomena, in Påli: rúpa, do 
not know or experience anything. What we call the body consists of 
different kinds of rúpa which arise and then fall away. Rúpas arise 
and fall away in groups or units of rúpas. Each group consists of 
several kinds of rúpas which always include four kinds of rúpas which 
are called the four Great Elements, as explained in Chapter 1. Rúpas 
of the body are conditioned by four factors, namely, by kamma, citta, 
temperature and nutrition. Rúpas outside, such as rúpas of a table or 
a tree, are conditioned only by temperature. 
The Buddha explained in detail about the different nåmas and rúpas of 
our life and the conditions through which they arise. Theoretical 
understanding of nåma and rúpa is a foundation for direct 
understanding of them, and this can be developed by sati, awareness or 
mindfulness of the nåma and rúpa appearing at the present moment. 
There are many levels of sati; sati is heedful, non-forgetful, of what 
is wholesome. There is sati with generosity, dåna, with the observance 
of moral conduct, síla, with the development of tranquil meditation, 
samatha, and with the development of insight or right understanding, 
vipassanå. In the development of insight, sati is mindful of whatever 
reality presents itself through one of the six doors. Absolute 
realities, nåma and rúpa, not concepts, are the objects of mindfulness 
and right understanding. 
Paññå develops progressively in different stages of insight knowledge. 
When the first stage of insight knowledge arises there is no doubt 
about the difference between the characteristic of nåma and the 
characteristic of rúpa. At a higher stage of insight the arising and 
falling away of nåma and rúpa, their impermanence, can be penetrated. 
In the course of the development of insight a clearer understanding is 
gained of the three characteristics of conditioned realities, namely 
the characteristics of impermanence, dukkha and non-self. 
Dukkha is translated as suffering or unsatisfactoriness. It is the 
unsatisfactoriness due to the impermanence of conditioned realities, 
as Ms Sujin explains in Chapter 5. When paññå has been developed to 
the degree that enlightenment can be attained, the four noble Truths 
are penetrated, which are: dukkha, the origination of dukkha, the 
cessation of dukkha and the Path leading to the cessation of dukkha. 
The origination of dukkha is craving. The Buddha explained that so 
long as there is craving there will be dukkha. There will be the 
arising and falling away of nåma and rúpa again and again and this is 
dukkha. When the last citta of this life, the dying-consciousness, has 
fallen away, it will be succeeded by the first citta of the next life, 
the rebirth-consciousness. At rebirth there is again arising and 
falling away of nåma and rúpa, and this is dukkha. Ignorance and 
craving are the conditions for the continuation in the cycle of birth 
and death, and so long as we are in this cycle there is dukkha. When 
wisdom has been fully developed all defilements are eradicated and 
this means the end of rebirth, the end of dukkha. 
Defilements are progressively eradicated at the four stages of 
enlightenment: the stage of the streamwinner, sotåpanna, the stage of 
the once-returner, sakadågåmí, the stage of the non-returner, anågåmí, 
and the stage of the arahat, the perfected one. The arahat who has 
eradicated all defilements, will not be reborn when he has passed 
away. 
The third noble Truth, the cessation of dukkha, is nibbåna. At the 
attainment of enlightenment nibbåna, the uncondi-tioned reality, is 
experienced. Citta, cetasika and rúpa are conditioned realities which 
arise and fall away, they are dukkha. Nibbåna is the ultimate reality 
which is unconditioned, it does not arise and fall away, it is not 
dukkha. Nibbåna is the end of the unsatis-factoriness inherent in all 
conditioned realities which arise and fall away. 
The fourth noble Truth is the Way leading to the cessation of dukkha, 
and this is the eightfold Path. We come across the terms the 
development of the eightfold Path, the development of insight, 
vipassanå, and the development of satipaììhåna or the four 
Applications of Mindfulness. All these terms pertain to the 
development of right understanding of mental phenomena, nåma, and 
physical phenomena, rúpa. By the teaching of the four Applications of 
Mindfulness the Buddha showed that all nåmas and rúpas which appear 
naturally in our daily life can be the objects of mindfulness and 
right understanding. 

 






Chapter 1


Mental Phenomena and Physical Phenomena
Discussion in Battambang (Part One)

Sujin: You had questions about "Mindfulness of the Body" which is one 
of the four "Applications of Mindfulness". There is no doubt about it 
that we all have a body, but we used to take it for "mine" or "self" 
before we listened to the Dhamma. After having studied the Dhamma we 
learnt that all realities, all "dhammas"[1], are non-self, anattå. We 
should have right understanding of the term "dhamma", a reality which 
is non-self. 
The Buddha did not only teach the "Four Applications of Mindfulness", 
mahå-satipaììhåna, he taught all that is contained in the "Tipiìaka". 
His teachings have come to us today in the "Tipiìaka": the three 
"Collections" of the Vinaya or the Book of Discipline for the monks, 
the Suttanta or Discourses, and the Abhidhamma or "Higher Teachings". 
All the different parts of the Tipiìaka are in conformity with each 
other because they contain the truth which the Buddha himself 
penetrated at the attainment of Buddhahood when he was seated under 
the Bodhi-tree. 
When we have listened to the Dhamma, even though we have not heard all 
of it, and when we have acquired profound understanding of the meaning 
and of the characteristics of the realities the Buddha taught, we will 
be convinced that the three "Collections" have to be in conformity 
with each other. 
The Tipiìaka explains all conditioned realities as citta, 
consciousness, cetasika, mental factors accompanying citta, and rúpa, 
physical phenomena. Thus, if there would not be citta, cetasika and 
rúpa, there would be no Tipiìaka. The Tipiìaka teaches us that the 
realities the Buddha penetrated at his attainment of Buddhahood are 
non-self. When we speak about the body we have to understand what the 
body, which is devoid of self, really is. Besides, the body does not 
arise alone, without citta and cetasikas. When there is understanding, 
paññå, it knows the truth of realities. It does not only understand 
the characteristics of the realities we call the "body", but it also 
knows the different characteristics of the mental realities, of citta 
and cetasikas, which appear. Paññå can realize that what we used to 
take for "mine" or "I", or for the world, are only different types of 
" dhammas", realities, namely: citta, cetasika and rúpa. It is most 
beneficial to study the Dhamma. When we study the teachings we should 
also verify ourselves the truth of what we learnt, we should 
investigate ourselves the realities which appear in our daily life. In 
that way we will acquire a deeper understanding of them. For this 
reason, I would like the listeners to consider the Dhamma and to try 
to answer their questions themselves. You have questions about 
"Mindfulness of the Body", but when you investigate the truth 
yourselves, you will see more clearly that there are, besides the 
body, also citta and cetasika. 
Buth Sawong: Some people would like to know the meaning of "seeing the 
body in the body", as is stated in the "Satipaììhåna Sutta" in the 
section on "Mindfulness of the Body". 
Sujin: We could discuss about many realities, but since the time is 
limited for this Dhamma discussion I would like first of all to go 
into an important point, namely, the meaning of "dhamma". Everything 
which is real is dhamma. The body is dhamma. When we touch the body, 
softness or hardness appears. Softness and hardness are 
characteristics of realities, they are elements which each have their 
own unchangeable characteristic. Softness is always softness and 
hardness is always hardness, no matter whether we touch the body or 
things outside. When paññå understands that the characteristic of 
softness or of hardness, no matter whether it appears in the body or 
outside the body, is in each case the same reality, the same element, 
paññå can develop. When paññå has become keener it can realize that 
these elements arise because of conditions and then fall away 
completely. In this way there can be detachment from the conception 
that these elements are "self". Then one sees "the body in the body", 
which means that one understands that the body is not me, mine or 
self. 
Buth Sawong: What we call "the body", kåya, is made up of different 
elements which are joined together. Of what does the body consist?
Sujin: What we call "the body" is made up of different realities. 
Because of the joining together of different elements we can say that 
we have eyes, ears, nose, tongue and body, or we can distinguish 
different parts of the body, such as hair of the head, hair of the 
body, nails, teeth, skin, etc. 
Buth Sawong: When I hear the sentence, "seeing the body in the body", 
I do not understand to what refers the second word "body" of this 
sentence. 
Sujin: People are inclined to attach too much importance to terms, 
such as, "seeing the body in the body". They wonder which body they 
have to see, or how they have to see the body in the body. People know 
that they have eyes, ears, nose, tongue and body, but when and in what 
way do these appear? They should know that there is the characteristic 
of hardness in the whole body, from head to toes. Wherever we touch 
the body, hardness or softness appears right at that spot. There is at 
that moment impingement of an object on the rúpa which is bodysense[2]. 
The bodysense is a necessary condition for the experience of tangible 
object. If there were no bodysense the characteristics of hardness and 
softness could not be experienced. 
The realities which appear through the six doors, the doors of the 
senses and the mind, can be seen as six distinct worlds, each 
different from the other: the world appearing through the eyes, the 
ears, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind. This is called in 
the scriptures, "the world in the discipline of the ariyan"[3]. This 
helps us to understand that rúpas of the body can only be experienced 
right at the spot where there is touching, just for a moment, and that 
only one characteristic of rúpa at a time can appear. The whole body 
cannot be directly experienced. A rúpa which has arisen impinges, it 
appears and then it falls away immediately. 
This is the meaning of "seeing the body in the body". We should not 
think of the terms "body in the body" and wonder what the meaning is 
of the first word "body" and what of the second one. It is important 
to understand that there are different moments of experience: the 
moment of seeing is different from the moment of hearing. Seeing, 
hearing, smelling, tasting and the experience of hardness which 
impinges on the bodysense are all different moments of citta. At this 
moment there is the impingement of hardness on the bodysense. So long 
as there is still "attå-saññå", the wrong remembrance of self[4], one 
takes everything for "mine" or "self"; one believes, for example, that 
"my finger" touches a certain "thing" which is hard. However, if we 
have understood that there is no self, only dhammas, realities, and if 
there can be awareness of hardness which appears because of 
impingement on the bodysense, we will see that the rúpa which is 
hardness is a reality which has arisen because of conditions. If the 
rúpa which is hardness has not arisen it cannot appear. The hardness 
which has arisen and appears must fall away again. Hardness is not 
"self" or "mine", there is no self who can exert control over it. 
Buth Sawong: I understand that we have eyes, that there are things 
which appear through eyesense and that there is a reality which 
experiences what appears through eyesense. Is this what is called, 
"seeing the body in the body"?
Sujin: At such a moment there is not the "Application of Mindfulness 
of the Body", seeing the body in the body. We should remember that 
there are four "Applications of Mindfulness" or satipaììhåna: 
mindfulness of the body, of feeling, of citta and of dhammas. All that 
is included in the four "Applications of Mindfulness", the objects of 
mindfulness, are realities, dhammas. The Buddha taught "Mindfulness of 
the Body" because, from birth to death, from life to life, we cling to 
the whole body, from head to toes, taking it for "my body", for self. 
When there is "mindfulness of the body", sati is aware of the 
realities we are used to taking for "my body". When the 
characteristics of the "four Great Elements" (mahå-bhúta rúpas)[5] are 
known as they are, there will be detachment from the concept of "my 
whole body". 
When we have also studied and thoroughly understood the "Applications 
of Mindfulness" of feeling, of citta and of dhammas, we will see that 
the four "Applications of Mindfulness" are in conformity with each 
other. Realities are classified in many different ways, such as by way 
of dhåtus, elements, khandhas, "aggregates", and åyatanas, bases[6], and 
these are included in the "Application of Mindfulness of Dhammas". The 
different classifications of realities show different aspects, but we 
should remember that everything which is real can be object of 
mindfulness. The "Application of Mindfulness of the Body" is a 
separate "application" because everyone clings to the body, taking it 
for "mine". 
Questioner: Citta is the reality which experiences an object. It is 
said that it "thinks"[7] of an object, because the object is cognized by 
citta. I would like to know what arises first, the citta or the 
object. What conditions what?
Sujin: Citta is a difficult subject, it is very detailed. We all have 
citta; we are seeing, and this is a citta. However, it is necessary to 
discuss and consider the reality of citta until one has clear 
understanding of it. Although people at this moment hear about citta, 
they do not understand what it really is, so long as they have not 
directly understood the characteristic of citta. Therefore, one needs 
to listen to the Dhamma again and again. 
Citta is the reality which experiences an object. This shows us that 
citta and the object cannot exist without each other. It is of no use 
to speculate about it what arises first and what arises afterwards. 
The Buddha, at the attainment of Buddhahood, penetrated the truth of 
all realities. He taught that at the moment of seeing visible object, 
of hearing sound, of smelling odour, of tasting flavour and of 
touching tangible object, that in all those cases the rúpa which is 
sense object arises before the citta which experiences it. The rúpa 
which arises previously to the citta which experiences it is 
"prenascence condition" (purejåta paccaya) for that citta[8]. A rúpa 
which is a sense object impinges on the relevant sense-base, but it is 
not immediately experienced by citta which is sense-cognition, such as 
seeing or hearing. When a sense object impinges on a sense-base, there 
are bhavanga-cittas[9] before a sense-door process of cittas begins and a 
sense-cognition such as seeing or hearing can arise and experience the 
object which is impinging[10]. 
When we consider the relation between seeing-consciousness and visible 
object which appears through eyes, and the relation between 
hearing-consciousness and sound which appears through ears, we should 
remember that the rúpa which is the object of citta must arise 
previously to the citta which experiences it. Thus, that rúpa 
conditions the citta by way of "prenascence condition". 
There are other kinds of objects besides rúpa, but when we refer to 
objects which are "prenascence-condition", these are the rúpas which 
are sense-objects appearing through the five sense-doors. For example, 
in the case of seeing, the rúpa which is visible object has arisen 
before the seeing and impinged on the eyesense, and then 
seeing-consciousness can arise afterwards. When we consider the true 
nature of nåma and rúpa, they should be distinguished from each other. 
They each arise because of their own conditions. Rúpa arises and falls 
away according to its own conditions. There are four factors which can 
cause the origination of rúpa: kamma, citta, temperature or nutrition[11]. 
No matter whether citta experiences rúpa or not, rúpa arises and falls 
away according to its own conditions. 
When we discuss the Dhamma we should speak about it in detail. For 
example, the rúpa which is originated by kamma (kammajå-rúpa) arises 
all the time from the moment of rebirth-consciousness on. At the 
moment of birth the rúpa which is produced by kamma arises together 
with the rebirth-consciousness which is also produced by kamma, and 
thus, the arising of that rúpa is conditioned by the 
rebirth-consciousness. After that moment there is time and again, 
throughout life, the arising of rúpa produced by kamma, but it is not 
anymore dependant on a citta which arises simultaneously[12], as was the 
case at rebirth.
There are also rúpas which are originated by citta. These kinds of 
rúpa are produced by citta at its arising moment. Each moment of citta 
can be subdivided into three extremely short moments: the arising 
moment, the moment of its persisting and the moment of its falling 
away. Each kind of rúpa has a different origin: kamma, citta, 
temperature or nutrition[13]. A sense object, which is rúpa, experienced 
by citta through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense or mind-door, is 
originated by one of the four conditioning factors of kamma, citta, 
temperature or nutrition. 
Not only rúpa, but nåma also arises according to its own conditions. 
For example, each citta which arises and then falls away conditions 
the arising of the succeeding citta, it is the "contiguity condition" 
(anantara paccaya) for the following citta. Throughout life there is 
an uninterrupted series of cittas which succeed one another. The 
contiguity condition pertains to citta and cetasikas which have fallen 
away and are the condition for the arising of the succeeding citta and 
cetasikas. Only nåma can be contiguity condition, rúpa cannot[14] . Nåma 
and rúpa arise each because of different conditioning factors. Thus, 
we have to distinguish nåma from rúpa. 


Chapter 2


Confidence in the Buddha's Teachings
Discussion in Battambang (Part Two)

Buth Sawong: The listeners have questions about akusala kamma. The 
citta cannot think of akusala kamma, unwholesome deeds, which have 
been performed many lives ago. We do not know which akusala kammas we 
have performed in former lives, but the tendency to akusala has been 
accumulated, it has become stronger and stronger. What can we do to 
overcome these accumulated tendencies to akusala?
Sujin: At the attainment of Buddhahood, the Buddha realized the truth 
of Dhamma by his wisdom which eradicated defilements completely. His 
teaching is different from all other teachings and methods. The 
highest degree of wisdom taught by other religions and philosophies is 
only the degree which can temporarily subdue defilements. Defilements 
can only be completely eradicated by paññå, wisdom, developed through 
satipaììhåna, which is actually the development of right understanding 
of the eightfold Path[15]. Only the Buddha has taught this Path, there is 
no other way leading to the eradication of defilements. 
Bhikkhu: I can develop this Path sometimes, but I want to develop it 
thoroughly and reach the goal. I do not know how many lives it will 
take to reach the goal. I have listened to lectures about vipassanå, 
the development of insight, and I have heard that through insight 
clinging and the other defilements can be eradicated. The eradication 
of defilements is most important, but it is extremely difficult, not 
only for laypeople but also for bhikkhus. 
Sujin: The venerable bhikkhu said that the eradication of defilements 
is difficult, no matter it concerns bhikkhus or laypeople. It is only 
paññå which can eradicate defilements. If paññå does not arise it is 
impossible to eradicate them. 
Through the accumulation of wisdom together with all the other 
perfections[16] the Bodhisatta could in his last life, at the attainment 
of enlightenment, become an omniscient Buddha. Therefore, everyone who 
is sincerely interested in the Dhamma and who is motivated to study 
it, should realize that the development of paññå is of the highest 
benefit. Without paññå it is impossible to eradicate defilements, and 
if someone who does not develop paññå believes that he can eradicate 
them, he is utterly deluded. Each person has accumulated many 
defilements during countless lives, they are accumulated from the past 
on to this present life, and in this life from the moment of birth 
until now. However, we should not be discouraged because of this. If 
we listen to the Dhamma and there is more understanding of it, we can 
very gradually learn to investigate the characteristics of the 
realities which appear. This is the way leading to the realization of 
the truth that dhamma is dhamma, not "I", mine or self. 
When someone begins to listen to the Dhamma and sees that the Dhamma 
is a most difficult subject, he should not become disheartened. If 
people, instead of being discouraged, begin to develop paññå, they 
will see that what at first seemed most complicated gradually becomes 
clearer. The development of right understanding in daily life can 
become one's habitual inclination and eventually one will be able to 
fully develop it. 
Buth Sawong: The listeners say that while they are listening to the 
Dhamma their minds are occupied with the Dhamma, and there is 
understanding of it. However, when they have finished listening they 
are distracted, they are absorbed in other things. What should they do 
in order to cause the citta to be firm and steady with regard to what 
is wholesome, to be intent on the Dhamma all the time? 
Sujin: This is not possible all the time. However, the citta can 
gradually become more intent on the Dhamma, depending on one's 
understanding and confidence. The person who has understanding of the 
Dhamma will not be forgetful of what he has heard, he will ponder over 
it and consider it. If he has free time he may be inclined to read the 
scriptures. When he wakes up in the morning he may still think of the 
Dhamma he has heard. He may, for example, remember what he heard about 
rúpas of the body. When he touches hardness he can remember that 
tangible object is not self, not a being, not a person. No matter 
whether we are asleep or awake, sit, lie down, stand or walk, there is 
the body; the body is right at hand. There are rúpas of the body 
appearing whenever we touch what is hard or soft. If someone has firm 
remembrance of the Dhamma he has heard, and if he has accumulated 
confidence and the other "spiritual faculties", indriyas[17], there are 
the right conditions for the arising of mindfulness. Sati can be 
directly aware of the characteristics of realities which are appearing 
at the present moment. Then he understands that the dhammas, the 
realities which are appearing, are not abstract categories. Citta, 
cetasika and rúpa, all realities which are explained in the Tipiìaka, 
are appearing now. The truth of Dhamma pertains to this very moment.
As paññå develops there can be awareness and investigation of the 
characteristics of realities and in this way they will be seen more 
clearly. However, if people cling to paññå it cannot be developed. 
When we have listened to the Dhamma we acquire more understanding of 
it, and then, in accordance with what we have learnt about realities, 
sati can be aware of the characteristics of realities which appear. 
Some people have a great deal of understanding whereas others do not 
have much understanding, depending on the extent they have listened to 
the Dhamma and considered it. Listening to the Dhamma, intellectual 
understanding of it and pondering over it, these are conditions which 
support the arising of sati, and in this way the truth about realities 
can be understood more clearly. However, we should not be negligent 
with regard to the development of understanding. 
We should remember that the Buddha in countless former lives as a 
Bodhisatta had to accumulate the "perfections". In his last life 
during which he attained enlightenment, he was a human being, just 
like all of us who are sitting here. He was seeing visible object 
through the eyes, hearing sound through the ears and thinking of 
different things; he was not all the time thinking of the Dhamma. 
However, he needed to know the true nature of seeing while he was 
seeing, he needed to know the true nature of hearing while he was 
hearing. He needed to know these phenomena as they are because they 
are realities. After seeing and hearing there are like and dislike of 
what has been seen and heard, and these are also realities which 
should be known as they are. 
The Buddha knew that it is extremely difficult to know the true nature 
of phenomena such as seeing or hearing, which are realities occurring 
time and again, in daily life. We could reduce our life to just one 
moment, because life actually occurs during one moment of citta which 
experiences an object and is then gone. However, if one is not a 
Bodhisatta one is absorbed in thinking for a long time about what 
appears just for a moment through the eyes, the ears, the nose, the 
tongue, the bodysense or the mind. The Bodhisatta was altogether 
different from us who are time and again infatuated with what we 
experience. Since he knew that the way leading to enlightenment was 
extremely difficult, he accumulated patience, energy and the other 
perfections, which were necessary conditions to attain Buddhahood. He 
had endless endurance and he did not become disheartened while he 
accumulated the perfections with the purpose to penetrate the truth of 
realities and to be able to teach other beings, so that they also 
could become free from dukkha just like he himself.
Everybody here has the opportunity to listen to the Dhamma which the 
Buddha realized at the attainment of enlightenment and which he taught 
to others as well. You do not need to accumulate the perfections to 
the extent the Buddha accumulated them for the attainment of 
Buddhahood, but you can listen to the Dhamma and practise the way the 
Buddha has shown us. 
Listening to the Dhamma, listening intently, is an essential condition 
for the arising of paññå, there is no other method to develop paññå. 
If people are listening only superficially they are not really 
listening to the Dhamma. They may call listening what is not really 
listening, because what they hear goes in at one ear and out at the 
other; there is no understanding of what they heard. Listening to the 
Dhamma is actually paying careful attention to what one hears and 
pondering over it with understanding. It is most important to remember 
that listening also means applying what one hears. It is not enough to 
have only theoretical understanding of what one hears, but one should 
also practise what the Buddha taught. 
Buth Sawong: The venerable bhikkhu says that he has listened already 
but that he now wants to really practise the Dhamma. However, he has 
many different tasks to accomplish with regard to the Order of monks, 
and because of his work his citta is distracted. He has no opportunity 
to sit quietly, alone. He has listened to the Dhamma and he has 
understood what he has heard, but he has no leisure time. He wonders 
whether there is only one way of practice or more than one, depending 
on one's way of life. A monk has a way of life which is different from 
the life of laypeople. He understands that laypeople can practise the 
Dhamma, but he, as a bhikkhu, has many tasks to do which make it 
difficult to practise. Since he himself is still young he has a lot of 
work to do. When he is older he will have more leisure time for the 
practice. 
Sujin: The venerable bhikkhu said that he had listened to the Dhamma 
already, but, our listening is never enough. Even the arahats in the 
Buddha's time continued to listen to the Dhamma. The Buddha taught the 
Dhamma for fortyfive years with the purpose to help people to 
understand the Truth. We may have listened for a long time, but if we 
do not come to understand the characteristics of the realities which 
are appearing, we have not listened long enough yet. It would be 
better, instead of wanting to practise, to begin to understand the 
characteristics of the realities appearing at this very moment. We may 
wish to have no more defilements, but can defilements be eradicated at 
all if we do not listen to the Dhamma and understand as they are the 
characteristics of the realities which are appearing? 
As regards the venerable bhikkhu's remark about his lack of free time 
for the practice, not only monks but also laymen have many tasks to 
fulfil; also many laymen complain that they have no leisure time for 
the practice. However, the practice of the Dhamma does not depend on 
the amount of free time one has. Just now, while we are sitting here, 
there are realities appearing. There are seeing and hearing, and these 
are real. Also when we are doing our work there are realities 
appearing. We cannot select a particular time for the understanding of 
this or that reality. It is necessary to develop paññå which 
understands the realities which are appearing in daily life, until 
there is complete understanding of them. In this way ignorance, doubt 
and wrong view of self can be eradicated. 
Buth Sawong: Some listeners ask how to apply the mind so that they 
have true confidence in the Buddhist teachings. 
Sujin: If people do not understand the Dhamma they cannot have true 
confidence in the Buddha's teachings. People may just repeat the words 
they have heard about the Buddha, namely, that he was the most 
excellent person who eradicated all defilements completely. However, 
if they do not understand what defilements are, where and when they 
arise, and how they can be eradicated, they do not know what real 
confidence in the fully Enlightened One really means. Thus, how could 
confidence arise? When there is true confidence, there can be the firm 
conviction that the Buddha is the Enlightened One, the Perfect One, 
who has taught the Dhamma for fortyfive years in order to help all 
beings. If someone has firm confidence in the wisdom of the Buddha, he 
will be inclined to listen to the Dhamma, to study it and to ponder 
over it, he will develop the wisdom which leads to the realization of 
the four noble Truths[18] which the Buddha has taught. 
Buth Sawong: Some of the listeners still wonder how to apply the mind, 
citta and cetasikas, so that they have firm, unshakable confidence in 
the Buddha's teachings. 
Sujin: This happens when the lokuttara magga-citta[19] and the 
accompanying cetasikas of the sotåpanna, who attains the first stage 
of enlightenment, arise. Then there is the taking of refuge in the 
Triple Gem with unshakable confidence due to his realization of the 
truth of realities. The ordinary person who has not attained 
enlightenment cannot take refuge in the Triple Gem with unshakable 
confidence, since he has not yet penetrated the truth of realities. He 
has not yet realized the truth that the realities appearing at this 
moment are non-self, that they are arising and falling away, as the 
Buddha has taught. So long as he has not penetrated the four noble 
Truths it is still possible for him to change to another belief. 
Buth Sawong: I would like to ask once more how to develop the mind, 
citta and cetasikas, so that there is no longer confusion, no more 
inclination to change one's belief. At this moment a great variety of 
beliefs are propagated in Cambodia. I do not want to become confused 
and drift away from Buddhism, I want to have firm confidence in 
Buddhism. 
Sujin: As I said before, there is the taking of refuge in the Triple 
Gem with unshakable confidence at the moment the lokuttara citta 
arises and this is the condition that one will not change anymore to 
another belief. Before someone can take his refuge in the Triple Gem 
in such a way, however, he should have confidence in the Buddha's 
wisdom, and for this confidence he does not only depend on the 
cetasika saddhå, confidence, but also on other sobhana (beautiful) 
cetasikas, such as paññå, understanding. If there is just confidence 
without any understanding, someone's belief in the truth of Buddhism 
cannot be well-founded. 
The Buddhists who feel that they have already confidence in the 
Buddhist teachings want to pay respect to the Buddha, recite texts and 
perform their usual tasks as Buddhists. However, they should also 
listen to the Dhamma and consider what they heard. The more they 
listen, the more will they understand the wisdom of the Buddha. The 
Buddha taught the true Dhamma, which everybody can immediately verify, 
without delay. 





Chapter 3


The Meaning of Dhamma
Second Discussion in Battambang

Buth Sawong: How do we have to practise according to the four 
Applications of Mindfulness?
Sujin: People often ask how they should practise satipaììhåna. Also in 
Thailand people ask this question. Instead of asking how one should 
practise and wondering about it, one should, from the beginning, have 
right understanding of realities, of paramattha dhammas. At this 
moment we are seeing and hearing; these are realities and, as the 
Buddha taught, they are non-self. Seeing is just one moment of citta 
which arises because of conditions and then falls away. One should, 
instead of wondering how one should practise, understand the realities 
which appear at this moment. We should understand that seeing is 
dhamma, hearing is dhamma, thinking is dhamma, smelling is dhamma, 
tasting is dhamma. Everything is dhamma, dhamma is never lacking. Does 
paññå know already the characteristics of the dhammas as they are? 
People should not try to practise in an unnatural way, but they should 
develop right understanding which knows more and more the 
characteristics of the realities which are appearing naturally, in 
daily life. 
Buth Sawong: What exactly are dhammas?
Sujin: The word "dhamma" refers to everything which is real. In Påli 
the word "sacca-dhamma"[20], true dhamma, is also used, and this word 
designates that which is real. At this moment there is seeing, and 
this is real. Therefore, seeing is sacca-dhamma, true dhamma. Hearing 
is also sacca-dhamma, true dhamma. At this moment there is 
sacca-dhamma or dhamma, but when there is ignorance, dhammas are not 
known. The Buddha, at the attainment of enlightenment, penetrated each 
kind of dhamma, he realized their true nature. He understood that 
there are only realities which arise because of their appropriate 
conditions and which are not a being, not a person, not self. However, 
so long as we have not understood realities as they are, we cling to 
the wrong view of "I am seeing", "I am hearing", and we cling to the 
rúpas of the body as "my body". 
Buth Sawong: Some people think that our ordinary life at this moment 
is not dhamma. Is this correct?
Sujin: If this moment is not dhamma, what is then dhamma?
Buth Sawong: Everything which is seen or heard, no matter it is alive 
or not, is dhamma. 
Sujin: This is right, and all dhammas are anattå. We read in the 
Dhammapada (vs. 277-279, Khuddaka Nikåya):

All conditioned realities are impermanent.
All conditioned realities are dukkha.
All dhammas are anattå[21]. 

This shows us that everything, nothing excluded, is dhamma, a reality 
which is non-self. The characteristic of hardness, for example, is 
dhamma. Can anybody cause the arising of hardness? There isn't anybody 
who can cause its arising. It arises because of its appropriate 
conditions. All phenomena which are real are dhammas. 
Buth Sawong: What is the meaning of the penetration of the true nature 
of dhammas? 
Sujin: At this moment realities are appearing. Before we are able to 
penetrate the true nature of dhammas, we should know, one at a time, 
the characteristics of realities which we are used to taking for self. 
The understanding of dhammas is conditioned by listening, studying and 
considering. In this way we will know that there are two kinds of 
realities: nåma dhamma, the reality which knows or experiences 
something, and rúpa dhamma, the reality which does not experience 
anything. Seeing, for example, is the reality which experiences what 
appears through the eyes, whereas that which appears through the eyes, 
visible object, does not know anything. When paññå clearly understands 
the characteristics of nåma dhamma and rúpa dhamma as only realities 
which are non-self, it will realize later on their arising and falling 
away and it will penetrate the four noble Truths. 
Buth Sawong: I know that all realities are not self, not a being, not 
a person. I know that everything with consciousness and without it is 
impermanent, but I would like to know what the realization of the four 
noble Truths means. Is knowing that realities are impermanent and 
dukkha the realization of the four noble Truths?
Sujin: Knowing these things is not yet the penetration of the four 
noble Truths. 
Buth Sawong: Knowing that all realities which are dukkha are non-self, 
is that right understanding of the truth? 
Sujin: Is there understanding of dukkha now, while you are sitting 
here? What is it that understands dukkha now? In other words, is there 
at this moment sati, is there the development of the eightfold Path? 
If sati does not arise, can it be understood that the reality which is 
seeing is nåma, and that it arises and falls away, that it is 
impermanent? 
Buth Sawong: What are the conditions for the arising of sukha, 
happiness, and dukkha, suffering?
Sujin: No matter whether a person is Cambodian or Thai, no matter 
where he lives, or whether he is rich or poor, so long as he has 
defilements he will have dukkha. Because of lobha, attachment, dosa, 
aversion, and moha, ignorance, he is worried and oppressed, and thus 
he is bound to suffer. There isn't anybody who is really happy and 
peaceful unless he has become an arahat who has eradicated all 
defilements and who, when he passes away, attains final nibbåna. The 
arahat will not be reborn and thus there will not be anymore dukkha 
for him. 
I appreciate very much the interest in the Dhamma shown by you, my 
Cambodian brothers and sisters. Your kusala in the past conditions 
your interest in listening to the Dhamma today. You are listening, 
because you know that the Dhamma is your true refuge. We can listen at 
this moment, because kamma is the condition that our life still 
continues, from one moment to the next moment, wherever we are. The 
moment of seeing or hearing something pleasant, wherever we are in 
Cambodia or somewhere else, is the result of kusala kamma. However, 
more important than pleasant experiences through the senses is the 
fact that you, conditioned by listening to the Dhamma in the past, 
have confidence today to go on listening and to develop right 
understanding. In this way the characteristics of realities which 
appear now can be understood as they are. Nothing else in the world is 
more valuable than the Triple Gem which is our true refuge. 
Buth Sawong: Should we drive defilements away or should we flee from 
defilements?
Sujin: Defilements accompany the citta, they have been accumulated. No 
matter to where you flee, defilements will always go with you. Where 
there is citta there are defilements. But when the citta is kusala, 
when there is paññå, there are no lobha, dosa or moha; there are at 
that moment no defilements which cause dukkha. 
Buth Sawong: What should I do to overcome defilements?
Sujin: Do you believe that you can overcome defilements yourself? Or 
should you develop right understanding, paññå, which performs the 
function of eradicating defilements?
Buth Sawong: Some people ask what they should do to attain nibbåna. 
Sujin: At this moment nibbåna does not appear. You are seeing or 
hearing now. When you have penetrated the characteristics of the 
realities which are appearing now, clinging to these realities can be 
eliminated. When paññå has been developed to the degree that 
enlightenment can be attained, the citta turns away from conditioned 
realities which arise and fall away, it has no inclination to 
experience them; it turns towards the unconditioned reality, to 
nibbåna. At the moment of enlightenment paññå is lokuttara paññå, 
supramundane paññå. 
Buth Sawong: People have questions about the different degrees of the 
state of the sotåpanna, of people who have reached the first stage of 
enlightenment. Different sotåpannas have a different number of 
rebirths and different kinds of rebirths. 
Sujin: This depends on the strength of paññå of the sotåpanna. If he 
has a high degree of paññå he will be reborn only once. If he has a 
lesser degree of paññå he will be reborn more than once, but, 
according to the scriptures, the sotåpanna cannot be reborn more than 
seven times[22]. 
Buth Sawong: How can there be different degrees of the paññå which 
penetrates the four noble Truths at the moment of enlightenment? Can a 
distinction be made between paññå of a lesser degree and of a higher 
degree? 
Sujin: This can be compared with the passing of an examination by 
different students. They all pass the examination, but some have high 
marks and others have low marks, depending on their different degrees 
of knowledge and capacity. Even so, when enlightenment is attained, 
the paññå of different people has different degrees, but be it of a 
lesser degree or of a higher degree, it penetrates the four noble 
Truths. 





Chapter 4


Listening to the Dhamma
Dhamma Discussion with Cambodians in Nakorn Nåyok (Thailand) (Part One)

Sujin: I wish to pay my deepest respect to the venerable bhikkhu who 
is present here. I am so happy that you all have come here for a 
discussion on the Dhamma. For a discussion on the Dhamma I should not 
be the only person who speaks, but different people should take part 
in the discussion. If there are problems and questions concerning the 
Dhamma, please, let us discuss these now, because our time is limited. 
Interpreter: We do not dare to ask questions yet. 
Sujin: If there are no questions yet, I would like to speak about the 
Triple Gem, about the meaning of taking refuge in the Triple Gem[23]. As 
we all know, we take our refuge in the Exalted One, the Buddha, the 
Fully Enlightened One. We take refuge in his wisdom, his purity, and 
his compassion. Taking refuge in the Buddha seems nothing 
extraordinary. However, if people do not study and if they do not have 
profound understanding of the meaning of the Buddha's wisdom, purity 
and compassion, they pay respect only in a superficial way, they 
follow only what they know about these qualities from hearsay. If we 
want to know what the Buddha's wisdom, purity and compassion really 
are, we should study and investigate the Dhamma. If people have not 
studied the Dhamma, they do not really know what it means that the 
Buddha was a person without defilements. 
There must be a way leading to the eradication of defilements. After 
the Buddha attained enlightenment, he showed this way to others. 
Therefore, we must really understand what the Dhamma is the Buddha 
penetrated at the attainment of enlightenment and taught to others as 
well. The Dhamma is something people cannot conceive by themselves. 
The Buddha accumulated the excellent qualities which are the 
"perfections" for four incalculable periods of time and a hundred 
thousand aeons, in order to realize at the attainment of enlightenment 
the true Dhamma (sacca dhamma). Thus he was able to teach the Dhamma 
to others as well. 
We should have right understanding of the word "sacca dhamma", true 
Dhamma, the Dhamma which is the truth. Nobody can change the nature of 
that which is true, that which is real. There is at this moment 
dhamma, that which is true or real. If we do not study the teachings, 
we may try to find the true dhamma somewhere else, but if we study 
what the Buddha taught we will know that at this very moment there is 
true dhamma, dhamma which is real, and everybody can verify for 
himself the truth of dhamma. Everybody who is born has eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. It is through eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, bodysense and mind that we can know dhammas, realities. If 
there were no seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, the experience of 
tangible object and thinking, nobody could know that there are 
dhammas, realities. Since realities are known because of the 
experiences through the senses and the mind, we do not have to look 
for dhamma somewhere else. Seeing at this moment is dhamma, it is a 
reality which sees. In the Tipiìaka the Buddha explains the truth of 
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, the experience of tangible object 
and thinking. At this moment there is already dhamma, but because of 
ignorance we are not able to understand that there are dhammas, not 
self. Therefore, we have to listen to the teachings of the Buddha who 
explains that everything is dhamma.

The dhamma which appears through eyes at this moment appears because 
it has arisen. If it had not arisen it could not appear. The dhamma 
which is sound appearing through the ears, is dhamma which has arisen. 
If it had not arisen it could not appear. Whatever arises must have 
conditions for its arising, and after it has arisen it falls away 
again. Someone who has developed paññå, understanding, is able to 
realize through direct experience the characteristic of impermanence, 
the arising and falling away of realities appearing through eyes, 
ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. He can directly understand 
that everything in and around him is dhamma which arises and then 
falls away. 
If one listens to the teachings one can have theoretical understanding 
of realities. When there is seeing, one can understand that this is a 
reality which arises and then falls away. When there is hearing, one 
can understand that this is a reality which arises and then falls 
away. If the realities appearing through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 
bodysense and mind are not dhammas, where else can dhamma be found? 
In order to be able to understand and to become familiar with dhammas 
one should, by listening to the teachings, learn more about the things 
which are real and which are appearing. In this way people will very 
gradually acquire more understanding of realities. Generally people 
are inclined to think of the result which is far off, namely the 
penetration of the noble Truths, the direct experience of the 
characteristic of nibbåna. However, if one does not know the 
characteristic of the dhamma which appears right now, one will not be 
able to realize the characteristic of nibbåna. At this moment the 
characteristic of nibbåna does not appear, but the reality which can 
be experienced through eyes appears. The reality which can be 
experienced through ears appears, it arises and then falls away, time 
and again. Therefore it is important to remember that we should 
investigate and study the Buddha's teachings. The Dhamma he taught is 
about all realities which can be experienced in daily life through 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. If we listen to the 
Dhamma we can gradually come to understand the characteristics of the 
realities which are appearing right now. We will not merely have 
theoretical understanding acquired by thinking about them, but we will 
have understanding of the characteristics of the realities which 
appear. 
Theoretical knowledge about realities is quite different from direct 
understanding of the characteristics of realities which are appearing. 
These are two different levels of understanding. We may, for example, 
speak now about seeing as a reality, a kind of nåma which is not self, 
an element which experiences visible object. When someone speaks about 
the nature of seeing but he is not yet aware of the characteristic of 
seeing while there is seeing, there is merely understanding on the 
level of thinking, thus, theoretical understanding which stems from 
listening and considering what one hears. It is important to consider 
and investigate the Dhamma one hears, this is a necessary foundation 
for right understanding. The understanding which stems from listening 
is accumulated and this accumulated understanding is a condition for 
the arising of direct awareness later on. Then there can be awareness 
of seeing when it presents itself and at such a moment direct 
understanding of its characteristic can develop; seeing can be 
understood as a reality, as only an element, not self.
Seeing does not appear through the eyesense. The reality which sees 
and the reality which appears through the eyes, visible object, which 
is rúpa, have different characteristics which should be distinguished 
from each other. Seeing experiences visible object, whereas visible 
object does not experience anything. Visible object is a reality which 
contacts the eyesense and which is a condition for the arising of the 
citta which sees. The reality which appears through the eyes, visible 
object, is different from the reality which appears through the ears, 
sound. Sound is another reality which arises and contacts the 
earsense. Sound is a condition for the arising of the citta which 
hears. Sound is a kind of rúpa, it is different from the citta which 
hears. All dhammas are non-self, they are not beings or persons. 
Paññå is developed by gradually understanding the characteristics of 
the realities which are appearing. We read in the Tipiìaka, in the 
Mahå-satipaììhåna sutta and also in other suttas, about the person who 
"lives contemplating" the characteristics of the realities which are 
appearing. That is, he is habitually inclined to be aware of the 
realities which are appearing. Not all realities appear, but all 
mental phenomena and physical phenomena of our life, also those which 
do not appear, arise and fall away. Paññå can directly understand only 
the realities which are appearing. 
Dhammas are the realities of our daily life, and gradually one can 
have more understanding of them by listening to the teachings and 
studying them. It is important to remember that realities appear here 
and now, that one should not look for them somewhere else but here, or 
at another moment but right now. When there is awareness and 
understanding of the dhammas which are appearing now, paññå can come 
to know them as they are, as realities which arise and fall away and 
which are non-self. When someone merely repeats the words, "dhammas 
arise and fall away", there is only theoretical understanding of 
realities, but no direct understanding of their arising and falling 
away, no direct understanding of the truth. 
If there are questions, please, feel free to ask them.
Interpreter: Some people wonder about the arising and falling away of 
realities. What arises and what falls away?
Sujin: There are now seeing and hearing. If paññå has been developed 
and it has become keener, it can understand directly the arising and 
falling away of one reality at a time. Those who have not yet studied 
the Dhamma or who have not considered it may only have theoretical 
understanding of the fact that seeing is not hearing. The development 
of satipaììhåna is the way the Fully Enlightened One, the Buddha, and 
all his disciples have gone. Also Buddhists today can, in following 
this way, practise what the Buddha taught, even at this very moment. 
However, people should begin at the very beginning, that is, they 
should first listen to the teachings. The Buddha taught Dhamma in all 
details for fortyfive years to his followers, and he taught also to us 
today. The Buddha taught during his life, before his final passing 
away, Dhamma to different people with different accumulations. Even 
when he did not teach in detail, people could, if they had accumulated 
paññå, while they were listening realize the arising and falling away 
of realities which appeared through each of the six doorways. 
Realities arise and fall away, both formerly and now; they are not 
self, they are not beings, not persons. Someone who sincerely studies 
and investigates realities does not delude himself with regard to his 
own understanding. Although he has heard that realities arise and fall 
away, that they are non-self, he may not directly experience the 
truth. When he is sincere, he knows that he has not realized the 
truth; he knows that while he is seeing now, it still seems that he 
"sees" this or that person or thing[24]. It is necessary to be sincere 
with regard to the degree of one's understanding and to remember that 
one should continue to develop paññå so that eventually realities will 
be seen as they are. 
Wherever and whenever we are seeing, it can be understood that seeing 
is only a kind of reality, an element which experiences an object, a 
type of nåma. There are many kinds of nåma. Seeing which experiences 
visible object at this moment is a kind of nåma. The citta which hears 
sound through the ears is another kind of nåma, different from seeing. 
Hearing is only an element which arises and then falls away, there is 
no self who hears. It can be compared to a fire which appears and is 
then extinguished. The fire which is extinguished has completely 
disappeared, it did not go anywhere else. The reality which arises now 
and then falls away has disappeared completely. It is not in 
accordance with the truth to take what has fallen away and disappeared 
for self or mine. During our whole life from birth until this moment 
there is no single reality which, after it had arisen, did not fall 
away. All realities are like a fire which originates and is then 
extinguished; they do not last and they are non-self. Hearing which 
has arisen just for a short moment has fallen away. The hearing of 
this moment is different from the hearing of a previous moment. The 
hearing of a previous moment is nowhere to be found. There is no self 
who hears, hearing is only a reality, a kind of element which arises, 
hears and then falls away completely. Realities arise and fall away in 
succession; they are succeeding one another until the last moment of 
this life, the moment of dying. We all know that death is departure, 
that it is the severance, the separation from everything; at death 
there is nothing left of our life in this world. It is the same with 
hearing which previously arose; it has fallen away completely, there 
is nothing left of it, it has "died". In the teachings the expression 
"momentary death" (khaùika maraùa) has been used. If we understand the 
meaning of this term we will see that there is death of each reality 
which has arisen and then fallen away completely. One does not have to 
wait until the approaching of death with developing understanding that 
there is nothing left of "ourselves". Paññå should realize "momentary 
death", namely, the arising and falling away of realities at this 
moment. In this way the wrong view which takes realities for "mine", 
self, beings or persons can be eradicated. We should gradually develop 
understanding of the characteristics of the realities which appear at 
this moment. Otherwise we will remain only on the level of theoretical 
understanding; we will merely remember the words of the Buddha's 
teaching about the impermanence of dhammas and their nature of 
non-self. 
Everybody here would like to know in what way he can penetrate the 
truth of the realities which are now arising and falling away and 
which are non-self. The Buddha showed the one and only way to realize 
the truth, and that is: awareness of the characteristics of realities 
which are appearing at this moment. People have heard about the term 
"sati", awareness or mindfulness, but this does not mean that they 
understand the characteristic of sati. One should listen to the Dhamma 
so that one can understand that sati is a sobhana (beautiful) dhamma. 
Sati is different from thinking (vitakka). Thinking can be kusala, 
wholesome, or akusala, unwholesome, and when there is unwholesome 
thinking there is no sati. We should know that sati is a sobhana 
cetasika (mental factor) which is heedful, aware of what is wholesome. 
We listen to the Dhamma at this moment, and if there comes to be more 
understanding of realities, it is due to sati which is aware, heedful 
with regard to what has been heard. When someone, however, is drowsy, 
takes no interest in the Dhamma, and thinks of something else, the 
citta is not kusala citta and thus there is no sati. From birth to 
death, throughout one's life, sati, thinking (vitakka) and other 
dhammas arise, but if one does not listen to the Dhamma which has been 
taught, there will be confusion about all realities. One cannot 
distinguish different characteristics of realities from each other and 
one will take them for self. Some people may use terms from the 
teachings they believe they have already understood, such as sati, 
samådhi (concentration) or paññå, but they do not know the meaning of 
these terms, or they give their own interpretation of them. If someone 
has studied the Dhamma he can have right understanding of these terms, 
he will know that sati is different from samådhi and different from 
paññå, and he will not believe that these three realities are the 
same. He knows that when a particular reality arises it does so 
depending on several conditions. Nowadays some people believe that 
they practise the Dhamma, but they do not know whether they have right 
understanding of the practice or not. The Buddha taught the Dhamma he 
had realized himself at the moment of enlightenment, so that those who 
listened could also develop paññå themselves. This shows the Buddha's 
incomparable compassion towards his followers. If someone teaches 
Dhamma it may happen that those who listen do not acquire any 
understanding from what they hear. If paññå does not arise as a result 
of listening to the Dhamma the listening is not helpful. Buddhists pay 
respect to the Buddha because he taught them the Dhamma in such a way 
that they could develop paññå themselves and penetrate the four noble 
Truths. When people listen to the Dhamma and they understand what has 
been taught, there will be paññå which knows in what way the Dhamma 
should be practised. There is no self who practises, there are only 
different realities, dhammas. Sati is not self, it is a particular 
kind of dhamma. Samådhi is another kind of dhamma and paññå is again 
another kind of dhamma. If there is no right understanding of what 
sati, samådhi and paññå are, people will mistakenly believe that they 
are practising the Dhamma. 
In the scriptures, the Tipiìaka, the Buddha taught what the right Path 
is and what the wrong Path. A person who has studied the Dhamma and 
who has right understanding of it knows which way of practice is the 
wrong Path and which the right Path. He knows that the right Path is 
the development of paññå which penetrates the true nature of the 
realities which are appearing. If someone believes that he can 
practise the Dhamma without understanding the realities which are 
appearing he is definitely on the wrong way. Thus, the wrong Path is 
the practice without the development of paññå whereas the right Path 
is the practice which is the development of right understanding of 
realities.
If paññå does not arise one does not know in what way the 
characteristic of samådi, concentration, is different from sati and 
from paññå, and then one is on the wrong Path. From the beginning we 
should know whether we practise the Dhamma at this moment or not. If 
someone believes that he cannot practise the Dhamma at this moment, he 
does not follow the teachings as contained in the Tipiìaka. Those who 
have penetrated the noble Truths have done so in their ordinary daily 
lives. Paññå can penetrate whatever reality arises naturally in daily 
life. However, if there is no paññå the truth of this moment cannot be 
understood. The Dhamma the Buddha taught is not something separate 
from our ordinary daily life; the Buddha taught the truth about what 
appears through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind, about 
lobha, dosa, kusala and mettå (loving kindness). The Buddha taught 
about all realities in detail. 
We should understand in what way sati is different from samådhi. 
People are often confused as to these two realities, they take samådhi 
for sati. They mistakenly believe that they should concentrate on 
particular realities and that is the right Path. If someone develops 
the way leading to the realisation of the noble Truths he knows that 
at this moment sati can arise naturally in daily life. So long as 
there is no right understanding of the Dhamma there is no foundation 
for the right practice, and therefore, it would be better not to try 
to practise at all.
All those who were disciples of the Buddha had listened to the Dhamma. 
The degree of their understanding of the Dhamma was dependant on the 
extent they had accumulated the "perfections". If they had a great 
deal of understanding, right mindfulness, sammå-sati, could be aware 
of the characteristics of realities and in this way their true nature 
could be penetrated in accordance with the Buddha's teaching. 





Chapter 5


Different Degrees of Understanding
Dhamma Discussion with Cambodians in Nakorn Nåyok (Part Two)

Sujin: We should know the dhammas as they appear in daily life. For 
example, is there dhamma when we are laughing?
Interpreter: There is dhamma, there is no person who laughs. 
Sujin: There are different feelings (in Påli: vedanå). When we do not 
laugh what kind of feeling is there?
Interpreter: There can be indifferent feeling, upekkhå vedanå. 
Sujin: We know the names of all the different feelings: pleasant 
bodily feeling, painful bodily feeling, happy feeling, unhappy feeling 
and indifferent feeling. People may only know their names. But when a 
particular feeling appears and there is awareness of its 
characteristic, feeling will be known as it is. Through awareness the 
different characteristics of different feelings will be known and 
understood as they are. 
There is, for example, indifferent feeling at this moment of seeing[25]. 
After seeing has fallen away happy feeling can arise together with 
attachment, lobha, and that moment is different from seeing[26]. When we 
are enjoying pleasant things there must be happy feeling which 
accompanies lobha-múla-citta, citta rooted in attachment. Whereas, 
when we listen to the Dhamma and we are happy that we hear things we 
had not heard before, there is happy feeling accompanying kusala citta[27]
. This kind of happy feeling is different from the happy feeling 
accompanying lobha-múla-citta. Realities have each their own nature, 
their own characteristic, and paññå is able to know the true nature of 
different characteristics of realities when they are appearing.
Do you think that this is difficult to understand, or easy?
Interpreter: It is difficult. 
Sujin: That is true. If someone believes that it is easy he deludes 
himself. The Buddha, the Fully Enlightened One, did certainly not 
teach a Dhamma which would be easy to understand.
When paññå can penetrate the true nature of realities it will be known 
that realities change extremely rapidly. Feelings change all the time. 
We all have moments that we feel unhappy, sad, discontented and 
depressed on account of our thoughts. At the moment of seeing there is 
no thinking, but after seeing has fallen away thinking can arise. Some 
people have unhappy thoughts, others have happy thoughts. Because of 
the Buddha's teachings we can come to know the true nature of the 
realities of our daily life, and thus we can see that his teachings 
are of immense benefit. We can verify the truth of his teachings 
ourselves. We all can find out, for example, that a moment of grief is 
different from seeing which is accompanied by indifferent feeling. 
Different realities should be distinguished from each other. Happy 
feeling or unhappy feeling can arise after seeing or hearing, they do 
not arise at the moment of seeing or hearing. If we gradually come to 
know the true nature of realities, ignorance and the suffering due to 
ignorance can eventually be overcome. If paññå realizes the truth of 
realities more deeply, that is, if it knows them as only dhammas which 
arise and fall away and which are non-self, the suffering which arises 
on account of our thoughts will become less. To the extent that paññå 
has become developed our suffering will decrease. 
Paññå which is of the level of theoretical understanding, conditioned 
by listening to the Dhamma, is quite different from paññå which is 
developed through awareness of nåma and rúpa. The latter kind of paññå 
is again different from the paññå which penetrates the true nature of 
realities at the attainment of enlightenment. The paññå of those who 
attain enlightenment is of different levels in accordance with the 
four different stages which are attained. The paññå which penetrates 
the four noble Truths at the attainment of the stage of the sotåpanna, 
the streamwinner, is of a level which is different from the degree of 
paññå which penetrates the four noble Truths at the attainment of the 
stage of the sakadågåmí, the once-returner; the paññå of the stage of 
the anågåmí, the non-returner, and the paññå of the stage of the 
arahat, the perfected one, are again different degrees of paññå[28]. 
Those who are followers of the Buddha should have great patience in 
order to listen to the Dhamma and consider what they heard, and in 
this way there can be more understanding of realities. This cannot be 
achieved by going somewhere else in order to follow a particular 
practice. If one is truly patient sati and paññå can very gradually 
develop. Moreover, we should be truthful as to our development of 
paññå. If there is still ignorance of realities we should realize this 
and not mistakenly believe that we know realities already. We should 
not delude ourselves, taking for paññå what is not paññå. So long as 
the realities which are appearing through the six doors are not known 
as they are, there is no right understanding which can only be 
developed by the right practice. Those who follow the Buddha's 
teachings must start in the right way from the beginning. When they 
are listening to the Dhamma they should do so for the right purpose, 
and this is: the understanding of realities as they are. The goal is 
not gain, honour, fame or praise; the goal is not to be esteemed by 
others as a person who has a great deal of paññå. From the beginning, 
paññå should be developed for the right purpose, it should not be 
developed with clinging to the understanding of the four noble Truths. 
Someone who develops paññå should be sincere with regard to himself: 
he should know whether there is already understanding of the 
characteristic of the reality which is appearing at this moment or not 
yet. If there is not yet such understanding he should continue to 
listen to the Dhamma and consider again and again what he has heard, 
and he should continue to develop sati and paññå. 
Nobody knows when he will die, when he will have to take leave of 
everything in this world. If we do not develop paññå the clinging we 
have accumulated will have the opportunity to arise again and again, 
also in future lives, and it will become firm and obstinate. 
Therefore, what is most valuable in our life is paññå which knows 
realities as they are. Paññå is the only factor which can eradicate 
defilements. We should see the invaluable benefit of paññå which is 
conditioned by listening to the Dhamma and which is able to understand 
realities more and more. Paññå should be developed without having 
expectations as to the moment when the four noble Truths will be 
penetrated. If one begins to gradually understand realities one is on 
the way leading to the penetration of the four noble Truths, to the 
experience of nibbåna at the attainment of enlightenment. There is no 
other way leading to this goal. One should not mistakenly believe that 
something else should be known but what appears in daily life. It is 
essential to remember this. The right Path is knowing realities as 
they naturally appear at this moment. If someone wants to know 
something else, if he does not develop understanding of the reality 
which naturally appears at this moment, he walks the wrong way.
Interpreter: Some people wonder about the meaning of dukkha. In the 
scriptures sometimes the term dukkha sacca, the truth of dukkha, is 
used and sometimes the term dukkha ariya sacca, the noble Truth of 
dukkha. They wonder whether the dukkha of the ariyans, the noble 
persons who have attained enlightenment, is different from the dukkha 
of ordinary people. 
Sujin: The realities which arise and fall away are dukkha and nobody 
can change this truth. The term dukkha sacca or dukkha ariya sacca 
refers to one of the three characteristics of conditioned realities, 
namely their arising and falling away[29]. Nobody can prevent the reality 
which has arisen from falling away again. The characteristic of the 
reality which arises and falls away is dukkha, because arising and 
falling away is suffering, not happiness. All people want happiness 
which lasts, which continues forever and which does not fall away, but 
conditioned realities have the characteristic of dukkha, because they 
arise and then fall away immediately. There are three characteristics 
common to all conditioned realities, namely: the characteristic of 
impermanence, that is, the arising and falling away, the 
characteristic of dukkha, suffering or unsatisfactoriness, since what 
arises and falls away cannot be happiness, and the characteristic of 
anattå, non-self. There is no self who can exert control over 
realities, because they are as they are, according to their own nature.
 
Interpreter: People are still confused as to the terms dukkha sacca, 
the truth of dukkha, and dukkha ariya sacca, the noble truth of 
dukkha. They believe that the first term refers to dukkha of ordinary 
people and the latter term to dukkha of the ariyans. I myself 
understand that dukkha ariya sacca, the noble Truth of dukkha is the 
first one of the four noble Truths, whereas dukkha sacca, the truth of 
dukkha, refers to dukkha as one of the three general characteristics 
common to all conditioned realities. 
Sujin: Dukkha sacca, one of the three characteristics common to all 
conditioned realities, is nothing else but dukkha, suffering, due to 
the arising and falling away of realities. The person who has directly 
realized and penetrated the three characteristics of realities is an 
ariyan, a person who has attained enlightenment. He has directly 
realized the truth through his own experience, he has realized the 
arising and falling away of realities, and this is different from 
merely repeating that all realities which arise and fall away are 
dukkha. A person may repeat these words without directly experiencing 
the arising and falling away of realities. 
Dukkha sacca is the truth of dukkha, and what is true does not depend 
on whether a person understands and realizes it or not. Nobody can 
change the truth of dukkha. The person who has realized by his own 
experience the truth of dukkha is an ariyan. Therefore, also the term 
dukkha ariya sacca, the noble truth of dukkha, is used, which is the 
truth of the ariyans, the enlightened ones, the truth realized by the 
ariyans. 
Interpreter: Some people wonder whether it is true that there are 
three levels of being a buddhist, namely, the beginning, the middle 
and the end. They believe that the beginning is the taking of refuge 
in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha[30]. They believe that the middle 
is, in short, wholesome conduct, and that the end is the realisation 
of the four noble Truths. Some people have wrong view, they do not 
take their refuge in the Triple Gem nor do they have wholesome 
conduct; they steal in order to obtain food. However, they still come 
to listen to the preaching of Dhamma in the temple and it is said that 
they then can become enlightened. I am puzzled and I wonder whether 
this is possible or not. 
Sujin: When people have listened to the Dhamma and grasped what they 
heard, they will understand who the Fully Enlightened One, the Buddha, 
really is. So long as people have not studied the Dhamma, they may 
just pay respect to the Buddha statue, but they may do so without any 
understanding of who the Buddha is. Those who have listened to the 
Dhamma will know that there is no other person except the Buddha who 
taught the truth of the Dhamma, which they can verify for themselves 
and realize through their own experience. 
When people listen to the Dhamma and consider what they heard they can 
acquire right understanding of realities which appear now, such as 
seeing and hearing. They can understand that at the moment of seeing 
there cannot be hearing, and that seeing has to fall away before 
hearing can arise. They can verify that the characteristic of thinking 
is different again from seeing and hearing. Some people who listen to 
the Dhamma are not able to understand it, whereas others who listen 
understand what they hear, they understand immediately that there is 
no self, that there are only different realities. It depends on the 
extent to which someone has accumulated the "perfection" of paññå, 
whether he is able to understand the Dhamma he hears and can develop 
paññå to such a degree that it can penetrate the true characteristics 
of realities and even realize the four noble Truths. When the Buddha, 
before his final passing away, explained the Dhamma, some people 
could, even while they listened, realize the four noble Truths and 
become arahats. Some people reached the third stage of enlightenment, 
the stage of the anågåmí, non-returner, others the second stage, the 
stage of the sakadågåmí, once-returner, and others again the first 
stage, the stage of the sotåpanna, streamwinner. King Bimbisara and 
the people of his retinue, for example, attained enlightenment to the 
degree of the sotåpanna. There were also people who listened but did 
not attain any stage of enlightenment. It depends on the degree of a 
person's understanding whether he can penetrate the true nature of the 
characteristics of realities or not. Those who listen to the Dhamma 
and understand what they hear can truly take their refuge in the 
Triple Gem. They know that there is nobody else but the Buddha, the 
Fully Enlightened One, who can teach the Dhamma. 
Interpreter: The Buddhists who have come here to listen to the Dhamma 
are full of enthusiasm and joy, they are so happy that they can meet 
you, Åcariya[31] Sujin. Some people wonder whether they, although they 
have not first undertaken five or eight precepts[32], can, after listening 
to the Dhamma, practise it and develop insight, vipassanå. Or do they 
first have to take their refuge in the Triple Gem and observe the 
moral precepts for a long time? 
People who ask such questions are confused about these matters, they 
have not applied themselves much to the study of the Dhamma. They like 
to use this opportunity to ask their questions so that they can hear 
your answer and gain more understanding. 
Sujin: Anumodana[33], I appreciate the interest of all people here. In 
this present time it is normal that Buddhists find it difficult to 
study and understand the Tipiìaka. Therefore, they are generally 
inclined to give their own interpretation to the Buddhist teachings 
and they believe that they have right understanding of the texts of 
the Tipiìaka. However, the Buddha's teachings are subtle and deep, and 
nobody can understand the truth just by himself. 
Interpreter: Is there a method by which sati can be aware of realities 
appearing through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body and mind? How can 
sati arise fast enough in order to be aware of the present moment?
Sujin: There is no method which can be followed, but at this moment 
realities are appearing already. One can begin to develop more 
understanding of them. If one first listens to the Dhamma and 
understands what one hears, sati can arise and be aware of realities. 
However, we have to listen again and again in order to gain more 
understanding of realities as non-self. What appears through the eyes, 
visible object, has contacted the rúpa which is eyesense; it just 
appears for an extremely short moment and then it falls away. If we 
gain more understanding of realities we will not forget that 
rúpa-kkhandha (the khandha of physical phenomena), vedanå-kkhandha 
(feelings), saññå-kkhandha (remembrance or "perception"), 
saòkhåra-kkhandha (formations or activities, all cetasikas other than 
vedanå and saññå) and viññåùa-kkhandha (consciousness), thus, the five 
khandhas, are not self, not "I". Listening conditions the accumulation 
of sati and paññå, and thus, awareness of the reality which appears 
can arise and at that moment understanding of it can develop. This is 
in fact satipaììhåna. Satipaììhåna is not a particular method which 
should be followed in order to be aware of realities. Satipaììhåna is 
the development of the understanding of the characteristics of 
realities which arise and appear, each because of their own 
conditions. 
Do you know ahead of time when realities such as hearing, anger or 
sati will arise? If there are not the right conditions for hearing we 
cannot cause its arising. Only when there are conditions for it, it 
arises. Even so, when there are not the right conditions for the 
arising of sati, we cannot cause its arising. When there are the right 
conditions for sati, it arises and then we will know that there is no 
self who can cause its arising. 
The development of satipaììhåna is very subtle; if there is no right 
understanding of its development people will cling to wrong practice 
(sílabbatå paråmåsa kåya-gantha). Only paññå can eradicate wrong 
practice. When someone does not know the difference between the moment 
when there is sati and the moment when there is no sati, he may try to 
follow another way which is the wrong practice. Right understanding of 
the way how to develop satipaììhåna is indispensable; paññå should 
know that sati is anattå, non-self, and it should know when there is 
sati and when there is forgetfulness of realities. If the difference 
between such moments is not known paññå cannot be developed. There 
will be clinging to the concept of self who tries to "do" something. 
The way to begin is knowing when sati arises and when there is 
forgetfulness. I will give an example. We all touch things which are 
hard. Even a child knows that something is hard, because hardness 
impinges on the rúpa which is bodysense and there is citta which 
experiences the characteristic of hardness. This happens time and 
again in daily life. When we just experience or notice hardness, it 
does not mean that there is sati and paññå. Someone, however, who has 
listened to the Dhamma knows that hardness is a reality which appears 
when it contacts the rúpa which is bodysense. Hardness is non-self, 
there is nobody who can create the element of hardness. Whenever the 
bodysense, which is all over the body, from head to toes, is contacted 
by something hard, the element of hardness appears. The true 
characteristic of that particular element presents itself at such a 
moment. However, when there is forgetfulness of realities and there is 
no right understanding, we take the whole body, from head to toes, for 
self. 
From the time we have been getting up in the morning until now we 
have, time and again, touched what is hard, but if one has not 
listened to the Dhamma one is forgetful of such moments. A person who 
has listened to the Dhamma and has grasped what he heard, has right 
understanding of the characteristic of hardness when it appears. He 
understands that it is only a reality which appears, not a "self". 
Just a moment ago we experienced something hard, and now, at this 
moment, we can begin to understand that hardness is only a reality. 
Such understanding is due to sati which has arisen and which is aware 
of the characteristic of hardness. When sati arises it is aware of a 
reality just for an extremely short moment, and after that there is 
again forgetfulness of realities, we are thinking of other things. 





Chapter 6


The Eightfold Path
Dhamma Discussion with Cambodians in Nakorn Nåyok (Part Three)

Sujin: When the Buddha explained about realities such as seeing and 
visible object which is experienced through the eyes, and the 
listeners understood the characteristic of sati, they could know 
whether there was mindfulness while seeing, or forgetfulness. When the 
Buddha explained about hearing and sound, the listeners knew, when 
sati arose, whether there was mindfulness of the characteristic of 
sound or of hearing, the reality which experiences sound. The Dhamma I 
am referring to now is the Dhamma the Buddha taught in the Jeta Grove, 
in the Bamboo Grove and in other places. If we go back to the Buddha's 
time, more than two thousand five hundred years ago, the Dhamma I 
refer to now was true also for people at that time. If people at that 
time were not forgetful of realities, they could penetrate their true 
nature. Some people could during the explanation of realities 
penetrate the truth, and others could do so after a more detailed 
explanation[34], but today there are no such people. Even after listening 
to an explanation about seeing it is not sure that there will be 
awareness of it. We should develop precise understanding of the 
realities appearing through the six doors and we should know whether 
there is mindfulness of those realities or not yet. People should 
investigate with regard to themselves when there is forgetfulness of 
realities and when there is sati. They should understand that when 
sati does not arise it is impossible to know as they are the realities 
which are appearing. It is impossible to force the arising of sati, 
but paññå can be developed little by little if one is sincere as to 
one's own development and knows for oneself whether there is sati or 
forgetfulness. This is daily life and people should know their daily 
life.
The Buddha taught the development of the eightfold Path and this 
consists of eight factors which are the following cetasikas:

right understanding or sammå-diììhi
right thinking or sammå-sankappa
right speech or sammå-våcå
right bodily action or sammå-kammanta
right livelihood or sammå-åjíva
right effort or sammå-våyåma
right mindfulness or sammå-sati
right concentration or sammå-samådhi

Right understanding and right thinking are the supporting factors 
which constitute the wisdom of the eightfold Path[35]. Right speech, right 
action and right livelihood are the supporting factors which 
constitute the síla, morality, of the eightfold Path[36]. Right effort, 
right mindfulness and right concentration are the supporting factors 
which constitute the concentration or calm of the eightfold Path[37]. 
Thus, there are síla, samådhi (calm) and paññå of the eightfold Path. 
When there is right mindfulness of a reality there is at that moment 
"training" in higher síla, higher citta (concentration or calm) and 
higher paññå[38]. These three kinds of "training" are called "higher 
training", because they are training of a higher degree, more subtle 
and refined than other kinds of training. At the moment someone 
performs akusala kamma there is ignorance of lobha, dosa and moha. 
When sati arises it can be aware of akusala, even when there is only a 
slight degree of lobha which does not have the intensity of akusala 
kamma; sati can be aware of the true characteristic of that reality. 
This is the higher training in síla, morality, because even a slight 
degree of akusala is realized. 
As regards samådhi, concentration, this is ekaggatå cetasika, the 
reality which is focusing on the object which is experienced; it 
conditions citta to experience only one object. There is wrong 
concentration, micchå-samådi, accompanying akusala citta, and right 
concentration, sammå-samådi, accompanying kusala citta. Whenever sati 
arises and is aware of the characteristics of realities, sammå-samådhi 
focuses on the object of mindfulness. At that very moment 
understanding of that object can develop, and gradually the 
characteristics of realities can be known as they are. 
The development of paññå is a kind of mental development which takes a 
great deal of time because sati does not often arise in a day, it does 
not arise as frequently as akusala citta. Sati arises very seldom, but 
when it arises and it is aware of realities, paññå can gradually have 
more understanding of them. When there is forgetfulness again, there 
is ignorance which does not know realities as they are. Every day 
there are many moments of ignorance and thus, a great deal of 
ignorance is accumulated, whereas sati and paññå can only be 
accumulated little by little. 
Right understanding is able to penetrate the true characteristics of 
all realities. When a person has realized the arising and falling away 
of realities, there can gradually be the elimination of the wrong view 
that realities are self, and then he can, at the attainment of 
enlightenment, penetrate the four noble Truths. The person who has 
penetrated the noble Truths at the attainment of the first stage of 
enlightenment is the streamwinner, sotåpanna. At that moment, the 
characteristic of nibbåna is experienced and doubt and wrong view of 
realities are eradicated. 
The sotåpanna knows that he is not a once-returner, sakadågåmí, who 
has realized the second stage of enlightenment, nor a no-returner, 
anågåmí, who has realized the third stage, nor an arahat, the 
perfected one who has eradicated all defilements. The paññå of the 
degree of the sotåpanna cannot eradicate lobha, dosa and moha. There 
are still accumulated conditions for the arising of akusala dhammas, 
other than the ones he has eradicated. Therefore, the sotåpanna has to 
continue developing paññå in the way he used to, and this is: 
awareness of the characteristics of realities which are naturally 
appearing in his daily life. This is the only way to reach the goal, 
there is no other way. 
Interpreter: What is the meaning of the expression: fixing one's 
attention in order to know realities in time? 
Sujin: This is clinging to the idea that realities are self. When sati 
does not arise and there is forgetfulness of realities, one takes 
realities for a "thing" which exists. For example, when there is 
seeing, people believe that they see a temple hall, persons and 
different things which seem to exist. Whereas when there is paññå it 
realizes that what appears through the eyesense are not people or 
different things but only visible object, a kind of element which 
appears through the eyesense. When we close our eyes that which was 
seen is no longer there; we can still think of people who are sitting, 
we can remember them, but such moments are different from the moments 
of seeing visible object which appears through eyesense. If someone 
closes his eyes and all the people would leave the temple hall, he 
might believe that there are still people inside the temple hall. This 
shows that the moments of thinking of concepts is altogether different 
from the actual seeing. Realities arise and fall away, succeeding one 
another very rapidly. The realities which alternately appear through 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind are taken as a "whole", a 
person or a particular thing. We should not try to fix our attention 
on a reality at a certain moment in order to know it "in time", that 
is impossible. It is sati itself which is aware of the characteristic 
of the reality which is appearing, one characteristic at a time, until 
it is clearly understood, until it appears as non-self.
Interpreter: The listeners would like to know more about the personal 
life of Achåriya Sujin: her education, her work, also her work with 
regard to the explanation of the Buddhist teachings. They would like 
to know about these things, no matter in short or in detail. I would 
like to be the interviewer. Is Achåriya from Bangkok?
Sujin: I do not know whether I can say that I am from Bangkok. My 
father worked in the Forestry Department and his children were born in 
the province where he lived. I was born in Ubonrajadhani, but I had my 
education in Saint Mary's school in Bangkok. I lived during my 
childhood in Bangkok until I finished the sixth class of the Secondary 
School. After that I passed the entrance examination to a school of 
preparatory education for Chulalongkorn University. Then I enlisted at 
that University and studied there until the second year. However, I 
did not finish my study there. Since I often missed lectures about 
important subjects and did not study regularly, I failed twice my 
examinations and finally had to leave the University. I then went to 
stay with my father who was at that time at the Forestry Department in 
Chiangmai. His children usually went to school from their early 
childhood in Bangkok, where they had someone to take care of them, 
since my mother had passed away when we were still very young. In 
vacation time we would visit my father in the province. When my older 
sister had become a bachelor of arts, she started to teach at the 
Prince Royal School in Chiangmai. I was given a special permit to 
teach at the Dara School, near the Prince Royal School. When my father 
left the government service and returned to Bangkok, we followed him 
and also went to live in Bangkok. 
Someone encouraged me to teach Thai to foreigners at the Thai Language 
Department of the Missionary School and there I taught for a long 
time. After that I left this school together with some friends and we 
founded our own school, namely the Thai Language School Association. 
Later on the school was moved from the building where it originally 
was to another one near my house in Sathorn. Finally my father sold 
this house were we had lived for more than forty years, and then we 
moved near my younger sister's house in Soy Patthanavet (Sukhumvit 
91). Since this was far away from the school I stopped teaching and 
delegated the teaching to friends, so that they together would 
continue this work. 
Interpreter: Where did you first study the Dhamma?
Sujin: I started with the study of the Abhidhamma. I came across an 
announcement in the newspaper the "Bangkok World", explaining that the 
Buddhist Association had started classes for the study of Buddhism and 
thereupon I began to study with Achåriya Neb Mahåniranan and with 
others who were members of an association of teachers of Dhamma. I 
mostly studied in the class of Achåriya Neb. At that time I was still 
working, but only half a day, and the rest of the day I spent 
reviewing what I had learnt from the Abhidhamma teaching on Sunday. 
Before 1957 there was not yet a translation of the Tipiìaka from Påli 
into Thai, there were only a few textbooks on Buddhism in Thai. After 
1957, when there were translations available, I started to study the 
Thai translations of the Tipiìaka and other books such as the 
Visuddhimagga ("Path of Purification")[39]. I visited Achåriya Neb almost 
every Thursday and when I had doubts about certain topics I asked her 
opinion. She explained such topics to me with great kindness. Whenever 
she wanted me to accompany her and help her to explain the Dhamma I 
went with her, no matter the occasion was a cremation ceremony in the 
province or something else. When I had studied the Abhidhamma for two 
or three years, Achåriya Neb asked me to give lectures on the Dhamma 
in the National Cultural Institute and also in the women's prison. 
Whenever Achåriya Neb wanted me to do something for the propagation of 
Buddhism I did it to my best ability. When Achåriya Neb founded in 
1963 the Research Centre on Buddhism and the Society of Spiritual Aid 
I lectured there as well. Later on I gave lectures in the Mahå-dhåtu 
Temple and then in the building of Mahå-makut College Association of 
the Bovornivet Temple. Nowadays I do not give lectures any more, but I 
help with Dhamma discussions and I review my lectures people have 
heard on the radio programs. Professor Somporn gives now lectures on 
the "Manual of Abhidhamma" (Abhidhammattha Sangaha). At the moment I 
am rearranging and reviewing all the tapes, more than two thousand in 
number, of my programs on the different radio stations. I review them 
in order to make them more compact, with less repetitions. 
Interpreter: You have read the Tipiìaka and studied it. How did you 
acquire understanding of the development of satipaììhåna from your 
study?
Sujin: There is no doubt that the Dhamma is our guide and therefore 
people should not be attached to teachers. It is very difficult to 
thoroughly and completely understand the Tipiìaka, both as to the 
letter and the meaning, but we are able to acquire more understanding 
of it by listening to any person who can explain the truth of Dhamma. 
However, we should not accept what is not in conformity with 
realities. We should not cling to persons, we should not believe in 
persons more than in the Dhamma itself. We should really have 
confidence in the Dhamma the Buddha assigned as his successor, as our 
guide. 
Everything which occurs does so because of the appropriate conditions. 
Nobody knows in the case of a particular person his accumulated 
conditions for such or such aspect of the Dhamma or for the performing 
of such or such task in the field of Buddhism. May everyone who has 
the desire to study the Dhamma help to make known the Dhamma in 
accordance with his own ability. If someone helps explaining the 
Dhamma, it is not necessary that there are many people who come to 
listen to him or her. People who have knowledge and understanding of 
the Dhamma can, each in their own way, help others who do not know the 
Dhamma to acquire understanding of it. There is no need to think, "I 
succeed this person", or, "That person succeeds me". Different people 
can each perform a task in the field of Dhamma, in accordance with the 
understanding and capability they have accumulated. 
The way to make known the Dhamma is to first study it oneself, in 
order to have right understanding. It is wrong to expect others to 
study the Dhamma and not to study it oneself. Someone may say that 
Buddhism is most beneficial, that it gives solutions to the problems 
in our life and in society, but does he really study the Dhamma 
himself? The person who wants to study Buddhism should be quite sure 
when he will do so. Otherwise he will keep on thinking about the study 
he will do in the future, instead of actually studying the Dhamma. 
When a person is sure when he will study the Dhamma he should also 
know what exactly he will study and where, in which place, he will 
study. These are things people should investigate in the right way; 
they should not neglect studying and gaining understanding of the 
Dhamma themselves, they should not merely repeat what they have heard 
from others. 
There is only one way which is the right way: everyone should be his 
own refuge by studying the Dhamma with the purpose to acquire more 
understanding of it. Everyone who studies the Dhamma and has right 
understanding of it, contributes to the propagation of the Dhamma, 
both with regard to himself and others. When people do not have right 
understanding of the Dhamma themselves they cannot propagate it.







Chapter 7


The Right Way and the Wrong Way
Dhamma Discussions in Pnompenh (Part One)

Buth Sawong: All people who are present here would like to hear about 
the development of satipaììhåna. I would like to know what the 
difference is between the paññå which is of the level of thinking of 
nåma and rúpa and the paññå which penetrates the true nature of nåma 
and rúpa. 
Sujin: First of all, people should listen to the Dhamma in order to 
have right understanding, to understand the truth that there are at 
this moment realities which are non-self. It is, however, not easy to 
understand that at this moment of listening to the Dhamma there is no 
self who listens, but that there are only realities, dhammas. 
Everybody knows that he is seeing now and that seeing is real. The 
Buddha explained that seeing is a reality which is nåma, an element 
which experiences something. However, people do not realize the truth, 
namely that seeing experiences only what appears through the eyesense, 
visible object. They still believe that what is seen are this or that 
particular "thing". 
We should listen to the Dhamma in order to have firm, well-founded 
understanding of realities. It seems that one sees at this moment 
people, flowers or a table, but one should know that the Fully 
Enlightened One, the Buddha, at the attainment of Buddhahood, had 
penetrated the true nature of realities, that he had realized that 
what was seen was only a reality appearing through the eyesense. This 
can remind us that the Dhamma which the Buddha penetrated is the truth 
appearing at this moment. 
Although people may have listened to the Dhamma already for some time, 
it seems that, when their eyes are open and there is seeing which just 
experiences visible object, they still see different people and things 
as usual. This shows that there is a great deal of ignorance. 
Ignorance, avijjå, is the reality which does not know the 
characteristics of realities as they are. 
Everybody here knows that he should continue to develop paññå, because 
paññå which is still theoretical understanding, conditioned by 
listening, is not able to clearly understand the true nature of 
realities. For the development of paññå it is important to know the 
difference between the moments that there is sati and the moments that 
there is no sati but forgetfulness of realities. When one is listening 
to the Dhamma there can be, because of sati which is mindful, 
understanding of what one hears. However, this is not the level of 
sati which is directly aware of the characteristic of the reality 
which is appearing. Listening is of great benefit if one also 
considers the Dhamma one has heard and thus, there can gradually be 
more understanding of the reality which occurs at the present moment; 
there can be more understanding of seeing when there is seeing. There 
should not be any expectation about the time when there will be clear 
understanding of realities. One can begin to understand that what 
appears through eyesense is only a kind of rúpa, visible object. 
Colour or visible object is conditioned by the four Great Elements, 
the rúpas which are solidity (the Element of Earth), cohesion (the 
Element of Water), heat (the Element of Fire) and motion (the Element 
of Wind). If there would not be these four Great Elements arising 
together with visible object, it could not appear[40]. Colour or visible 
object could not arise just by itself, as if in a vacuum. It needs the 
support of the four Great Elements arising together with it. Since 
these four Great Elements are arising together with it, we can 
perceive different shapes and forms. Saññå[41] can recognize these as this 
or that particular "thing". Saññå, remembrance, is not wrong view. 
Also those who have eradicated wrong view can, because of saññå, 
recognize what they have seen. 
 When sati has been developed and paññå has become keener, doubt about 
the difference between the characteristic of nåma, the reality which 
experiences an object, and the characteristic of rúpa, such as visible 
object appearing through eyesense, can be eradicated. But there should 
be a great deal of patience to listen to the Dhamma, to consider and 
investigate the truth that everything which appears at this moment is 
dhamma, reality. If sati arises it can be aware of the characteristic 
of whatever reality is appearing. 
In the beginning there is still the idea of self. Sati may arise, but 
there is still a feeling of wanting or trying to understand realities. 
It is important to notice the difference between the moment of 
understanding and the moment of clinging to the understanding of 
realities. We should be aware of our clinging to understanding, 
otherwise clinging cannot be eradicated. Clinging is the origination 
of dukkha, and this is the second noble Truth. Clinging is the cause of
 not knowing the truth of realities. 
We should know the purpose of listening to the Dhamma. The purpose is 
not obtaining something for oneself, it is not honour or fame; it is 
not being admired as a clever person who is full of wisdom. The 
purpose is knowing oneself, realizing one's lack of understanding of 
the characteristics of realities, one's ignorance of, for example, 
visible object which appears through the eyes. We should remember that 
what is most precious, so long as we are still alive, is paññå which 
knows realities as they are. 
If the Buddha had not taught the way to develop right understanding, 
we would not be able to be aware of the characteristics of realities. 
We would, our whole life, continue to see without knowing what the 
reality of seeing is. Because of the Buddha's teaching of Dhamma, 
people can realize for themselves when sati arises and when there is 
forgetfulness of realities. Nobody else can tell us whether there is 
sati or forgetfulness, we can know this only for ourselves. Even when 
sati arises, the characteristics of realities may not yet be seen as 
they are. However, sati can arise again and in this way there can 
gradually be a little more understanding of realities. One can 
understand that realities are appearing naturally in daily life when 
there are the appropriate conditions for them, and that also the 
reality of sati can only arise when there are conditions for it, that 
its arising cannot be forced. One should remember that it is sati, not 
self, which is aware of the characteristics of realities. 
Understanding this is the only way to eradicate the idea of self, the 
idea of, "I am practising". 
The Dhamma people hear today is the Dhamma the Buddha taught in the 
Jeta Grove, in the Bamboo Grove and in other places. People who have 
listened to the Dhamma understand that seeing, hearing, thinking, 
happiness or sorrow are realities, dhammas. This is the true Dhamma, 
sacca dhamma, this is the Dhamma which is true in each life. The 
understanding of the true Dhamma is conditioned, it depends on whether 
people have heard the Dhamma in former lives. If someone during a 
lifespan has no opportunity to hear and understand the Dhamma, then 
his life is full of lobha, attachment, dosa, aversion, moha, 
ignorance, and other kinds of defilements, and he accumulates all the 
time evermore unwholesomeness. Therefore, when there is an opportunity 
to listen to the Dhamma, we should listen and consider it, we should 
also investigate for ourselves the characteristics of the realities 
which are appearing at this moment. We should listen again and again, 
and continue to investigate realities in order to develop 
understanding, little by little. If someone intends to develop paññå 
he should accumulate it from now on. If he does not begin at this 
moment there cannot be paññå. 
I appreciate the kusala of the listeners which was accumulated in the 
past. This accumulation is the condition for the arising of paññå 
which understands the benefit of the Dhamma; it is the condition for 
being interested in listening to the Dhamma and applying it. 
Buth Sawong: I would like to ask again what the difference is between 
the paññå which is theoretical understanding and the paññå which 
directly penetrates the truth of the Dhamma.
Sujin: At this moment people listen to the Dhamma and they understand 
what they hear, but this is not yet direct understanding which, when 
there is, for example, seeing, penetrates the true nature of this 
reality. Hearing appears at this moment and people know that it is a 
kind of nåma, hearing-consciousness (sota-viññåùa), which arises and 
then falls away. They have theoretical understanding of this reality 
but they may not yet realize the true characteristic of the reality 
which hears sound, which is arising and falling away. Then there is 
only paññå of the level of thinking, theoretical understanding of 
realities. Hearing which arises at this moment is real, it is a dhamma 
which arises and falls away. So long as one does not directly 
understand the truth of the reality appearing at this moment, there is 
only paññå which is theoretical understanding, conditioned by 
listening. Whereas, when someone directly understands and penetrates 
the true characteristics of realities, he knows that this kind of 
paññå is different from theoretical understanding. 
First of all, people should know the characteristic of sati. Sati of 
the eightfold Path is not a "self" who is aware. Sammå-sati, right 
mindfulness, of the eightfold Path is aware of the reality which is 
appearing. When it arises there is not merely theoretical 
understanding. Sati is directly aware of the characteristic of the 
reality which is appearing, so that its true nature can be understood 
at that moment. Thus we can see the difference between theoretical 
understanding and paññå which directly understands the characteristic 
of the reality which is appearing. Everybody can find out for himself 
what level of understanding he has. 
When, in the past, the Buddha taught Dhamma and explained about the 
six doors of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and mind, the 
listeners could, when right mindfulness arose, each for themselves 
realize the true nature of the realities appearing through these 
doorways. When sati did not arise they knew that there was only 
theoretical understanding which was conditioned by listening to the 
Dhamma. 
It is paññå which can understand the characteristics of realities and 
we do not have to do anything special. If at this moment paññå 
penetrates the characteristics of realities it is not because of a 
self who has to make a special effort. There is no being, no person 
who is developing satipaììhåna. When sati arises and it is aware of 
realities, one can know the characteristics of sati and paññå and in 
this way the wrong view which takes realities for self can gradually 
be eliminated. Finally, there can be clear understanding of the truth 
that everything which is appearing at this moment is dhamma. Dhammas 
are appearing every day through the doorways of the eyes, the ears, 
the nose, the tongue, the bodysense and the mind. When sati arises it 
is aware of realities, and if it does not arise there is ignorance 
which does not understand realities. Sati can be aware of the 
characteristics of realities which are appearing naturally, one does 
not have to do anything special. Paññå develops very gradually, but 
this way is the right way of practice. Wanting to know something else 
but what appears now is useless. Realities are already appearing at 
this moment and thus whatever appears now can be understood as it is. 
If one does not understand realities yet, one should listen again, 
consider again, one should learn to be aware again and again, and thus 
there can be more understanding. Patience and perseverance are 
indispensable.
The right way should be developed. Someone takes the wrong way when he 
wants to know something else but the reality which is appearing at 
this moment. Then there is no paññå. If there is paññå it must be able 
to understand the characteristic of the reality which is appearing 
now. 
Those who have realized the truth can understand the great wisdom of 
the Buddha, they can understand that he at the attainment of 
enlightenment penetrated the truth of realities which are extremely 
difficult to understand. Realities are appearing all the time, but 
although one may have listened to the Dhamma for a long time, paññå 
may seldom arise and it may only develop very slowly. However, this is 
to be preferred to the wrong way where there is no paññå at all. 
Buth Sawong: Some of the listeners would like to ask how the four 
Applications of Mindfulness should be practised. I have noticed that 
there is a great deal of wrong practice. Many people practise in the 
wrong way mindfulness of breath, which is included in the Application 
of Mindfulness of the Body. They do not know the realities which 
constitute the body. 
Sujin: Please ask questions, because this is a Dhamma discussion. Let 
us discuss why a person does not practise in the right way. 
Buth Sawong: How can people practise in the right way?
Sujin: There is right practice and wrong practice. Now I would like to 
ask you in my turn: because of what does someone practise in the wrong 
way?
Buth Sawong: Please can you help us to explain this?
Sujin: The person who asks questions should consider and investigate 
these questions himself as well. He should find out which cause brings 
which result. If he does not think over his question himself, he will 
not know which cause brings which result. It is because of paññå that 
he can answer himself questions about the practice. If he cannot 
answer such questions he cannot follow the right practice. You may 
answer briefly to my question: what is the reason that someone 
practises in the wrong way?
Buth Sawong: I would like to ask again in a few words: how can someone 
practise in the right way?
Sujin: Could you just consider the reason why someone does not 
practise in the right way?
Buth Sawong: Because he does not know the truth. 
Sujin: He does not know what is wrong practice. He has ignorance, he 
does not understand anything. If he would have right understanding he 
would follow the right practice. Wrong practice is a form of wrong 
view, micchå-diììhi, and this is conditioned by ignorance. If someone 
tells other people that sitting is necessary for the right practice, 
do the people who follow this advice gain any understanding? If they 
do not gain any understanding while they are sitting, what is the 
reason for sitting? Understanding is indispensable for the right 
practice. The Buddha taught the Dhamma with the purpose of helping 
people to understand the characteristics of realities which are 
appearing naturally at this moment. The Buddha did not tell people to 
sit, but he asked them to listen to the Dhamma so that they would gain 
understanding. If people do not have theoretical understanding of 
realities which is conditioned by listening, in which way are they 
practising? If they do not have any understanding there is moha, 
ignorance, and there is also wrong view which conditions all kinds of 
wrong practice. 
It is essential to understand that there is no self who is practising. 
Everything is dhamma: right understanding (sammå-diììhi) is dhamma, 
wrong view (micchå-diììhi) is dhamma, lobha (attach-ment), alobha 
(non-attachment), dosa (aversion), adosa (non-aversion), moha, paññå, 
they all are dhammas, realities which are non-self. 
A person who has wrong view will follow the wrong practice, he cannot 
follow the right practice. Whereas a person who has right 
understanding cannot follow the wrong practice. If someone tells a 
person who has right understanding that sitting is necessary for the 
right practice, he will not sit, because he knows that by just sitting 
he will not develop any understanding, and that there is thus no 
reason for him to sit. 
Buth Sawong: How should we practice in the right way satipaììhåna, and 
in particular Mindfulness of Body?
Sujin: Why do you choose any particular object of mindfulness?
Buth Sawong: I read in the scriptures about Mindfulness of Body, but I 
do not know how to practise it. 
Sujin: There are the six doors of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 
bodysense and mind. The objects presenting themselves through these 
six doors constitute the "world" which appears to us; in fact there 
are six worlds appearing through the six doors. If there were not 
those six worlds we would not experience anything. At this moment 
there is seeing, but one may not know seeing as it is: only a type of 
reality, a kind of experience, different from thinking or hearing. 
What appears through the eyes is visible object, and this is different 
from sound. 
The person who realizes the truth at the moment of seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, experiencing tangible object or thinking, will not 
have any doubts about the four Applications of Mindfulness: 
Mindfulness of Body, of Feeling, of Citta and of Dhammas. There may be 
doubts about the names of the four Applications of Mindfulness, about 
concepts, but not about realities. The person who realizes the truth 
knows that there are realities of the body, rúpas, which are appearing 
time and again. The rúpas appearing all over the body, from head to 
toes, are dhammas, realities. Citta can experience the reality which 
appears through the bodysense when the body is touched. Are teeth, 
blood or heart appearing at this moment?
Buth Sawong: They exist in conventional sense. 
Sujin: You can remember that they are there, but do they appear at 
this moment?
Buth Sawong: They do not appear now. 
Sujin: They have already arisen and fallen away. What has already 
arisen and fallen away does not appear at this moment. But people 
remember them in a distorted way, as if they would persist. They take 
the whole body from head to toes for self. That is the wrong 
remembrance of self (attå saññå). 
The Buddha said that all dhammas are non-self, anattå. Rúpa-dhamma is 
rúpa-dhamma and nåma-dhamma is nåma-dhamma. They have each their own 
characteristic and nobody can alter these characteristics; they are 
realities which are non-self. Rúpa-dhamma arises and then falls away 
very rapidly, but nåma-dhamma which arises falls away even more 
rapidly then rúpa-dhamma. When the truth has been realized there is 
nothing left of our life but just one moment of citta which 
experiences the rúpa or the nåma which is appearing. People cling to 
the self, they know because of saññå that they have lungs, liver, 
heart or spleen which seem to persist, but when there is paññå it can 
realize that this is only thinking. Satipaììhåna is not thinking, it 
is the development of direct understanding of the characteristics of 
realities which are appearing. 
When we touch any part of the body, the characteristic of softness or 
hardness appears. Hardness and softness are rúpas which arise and then 
fall away immediately. Because of saññå we think of different parts of 
the body and I will give an example of this. Someone who had a leg 
being amputated still has a feeling that he has that leg. It is saññå, 
remembrance, which conditions him to think that he still has that leg, 
although it has been amputated. There is remembrance of all the rúpas 
of that leg. In reality the rúpa which appears now falls away 
immediately and, when there are the appropriate conditions, it is 
replaced by another rúpa which arises and falls away again. However, 
people think, because of saññå, of their whole body from head to toes, 
just as in the case of the person who had his leg amputated but still 
has a feeling that he has that leg. Only when the wrong remembrance of 
self, attå saññå, because of which one is used to thinking that the 
whole body exists, has been eradicated, can one really understand that 
all dhammas are anattå, non-self. Then there is nothing left of the 
body as a whole, there is only one characteristic of rúpa at a time 
which is appearing. This is the way to understand the meaning of 
anattå.
It is difficult to eliminate the wrong remembrance of self. When the 
rúpa which is cold impinges on a certain part of the body, it falls 
away immediately, but it is difficult to realize this. There is still 
remembrance of, "It is I who is sitting", there is still remembrance 
of arms, legs, head, of the body as a whole. The wrong view of self 
has not been eradicated. The Buddha explained that, when sati arises 
and is aware of the characteristic of the reality which is appearing, 
one at a time, through the bodysense, there is at such a moment the 
Application of Mindfulness of the Body. The Four Applications of 
Mindfulness are not something else but mindfulness of what appears 
through the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the bodysense or the 
mind. 
People should not select the object of mindfulness, because then there 
is clinging to an idea of self who can select such an object. Nobody 
can direct sati to a particular object, it is sati itself which is 
aware of such or such object. Sati can be aware of what appears 
through the eyes or of seeing at this moment when there is seeing. At 
such a moment there is not Mindfulness of Body. There can be 
Mindfulness of Dhammas or Mindfulness of Citta, depending on 
conditions. There is no method which tells one to do particular things 
in order to have Mindfulness of Body, of Feeling, of Citta or of 
Dhammas. There is no method at all to be followed. The only way to 
develop satipaììhåna is to gradually understand the realities which 
are appearing. Sati can be aware of whatever reality is appearing. For 
example, when there is seeing, there may be awareness of feeling. When 
there is awareness of the characteristic of feeling, there is at that 
moment not Mindfulness of Body or Mindfulness of Citta. The Påli term 
used in this context is vedanånupassanå[42] satipaììhåna, meaning: 
consideration or observation of feeling. This shows that paññå 
develops by being mindful, by considering the characteristics of 
realities. If people never are aware of the characteristic of feeling, 
they will continue to take feeling for self. 




Chapter 8


The Natural Way to develop Understanding
Dhamma Discussions in Pnompenh (Part Two)

Sujin: There is no particular method which should be followed for the 
development of satipaììhåna. The understanding acquired by listening 
which has been accumulated, conditions sati to be aware of the 
characteristics of realities which are appearing now. Understanding 
can be developed of the realities which are appearing naturally in 
daily life. It is of no use to ask which method of practice should be 
followed. If there is no understanding at this moment, it is necessary 
to listen to the Dhamma again in order to gain more understanding. In 
this way people will know at which moment there is sati and at which 
moment there is no sati but forgetfulness. If someone thinks of 
practising in the future there is no sati. Realities are appearing 
already but he does not realize this. It is useless to think of the 
future which has not come yet. If someone thinks that he will practise 
in the future he does not know that at this moment there are realities 
which should be understood. It is not helpful to wonder about what one 
should do, how one should practise. Sati can be mindful of seeing at 
the present moment which is real, or of hearing at the present moment 
which is real. It can be mindful of realities such as softness or 
hardness which are experienced by touch, of thinking, of happy, 
unhappy or indifferent feeling, or of pleasant or unpleasant bodily 
feeling. All these phenomena are real and they can be object of 
mindfulness.
We do not have to delay the development of understanding, we should 
not believe that we have to do anything special first. At this moment 
there is seeing which experiences what appears through the eyesense. 
There can be mindfulness of seeing. The characteristic of seeing is 
nåma, an element which experiences an object. We can see, we are 
different from a dead person who, even though he has eyes, cannot see, 
who cannot perceive a table or a chair. We can see so long as we are 
alive and we have not gone blind. At this moment there is seeing and 
this is only one moment of citta. Nobody can create seeing, it arises 
because of its appropriate conditions. The citta which is seeing is 
different from the citta which is hearing. We should remember that 
these are different realities. Gradually we can come to understand the 
characteristic of the citta which is seeing at this moment. 
Understanding cannot yet be clear in the beginning. If someone wonders 
of what there can be ignorance, the answer is that ignorance does not 
know as it is seeing which presents itself, that it does not know the 
true nature of what appears now. Paññå is the opposite of ignorance; 
paññå understands realities whereas ignorance does not know anything. 
Seeing arises because of its appropriate conditions. When sati is 
aware of seeing, paññå can at that moment understand its nature, it 
can understand it as a type of reality. Sati and paññå arise and fall 
away together very rapidly. They arise only when there are conditions 
for their arising. Nobody can cause their arising, but they can 
develop little by little. Their development takes a great deal of 
time. Nobody can, even when sati arises, have clear understanding of 
realities immediately. 
The Buddha, in order to be able to attain Buddhahood, had to fulfil 
the "perfections" from the time that the Buddha Dípaòkara[43] declared him 
to be a future Buddha, he had to accumulate them for four incalculable 
periods and a hundred thousand aeons. Ånanda accumulated the 
perfections for a hundred thousand aeons. Therefore, why should people 
ask how they should practise? If someone asks such a question it shows 
that he wishes to understand immediately the realities which appear at 
this moment, but this is impossible. The person who develops the 
eightfold Path must know himself, he must be truthful with regard to 
himself. At the moment when there is ignorance, he does not understand 
realities and at the moment when sati arises he can find out that 
there is awareness. When sati arises it is aware of realities which 
arise naturally in daily life. At this moment seeing arises naturally 
in daily life. We can investigate in the right way what seeing is, we 
can understand that it is a type of reality. At such a moment there is 
sati arising with theoretical understanding. When there is direct 
understanding of the characteristic of seeing as nåma, there is 
satipaììhåna. At such a moment there is understanding of the 
characteristics of realities as they are, but there cannot be clear, 
thorough understanding immediately. Understanding has to be developed 
gradually. The person who develops understanding has no doubt about it 
that if sati does not arise, if there is no awareness of the 
characteristics of realities, paññå cannot grow and that thus the 
characteristics of realities cannot be clearly understood. Therefore, 
he develops satipaììhåna naturally in his daily life. He realizes that 
there are moments when sati can be aware of realities, and that there 
are also moments when sati does not arise, but he has no desire to try 
to induce the arising of sati. He knows that sati does not arise 
because of one's desire for it. Each cause brings its appropriate 
effect. If someone wants to be a person who is intent on kusala he 
should begin at this moment. If he does not want to be angry he should 
from now on begin to be less inclined to anger. Kusala dhammas should 
be developed, they cannot arise just according to our wish. If one 
wants to develop paññå, one can begin to be aware of the 
characteristics of realities in a natural way, and there should not be 
an idea of "I" or self who is aware. When sati arises and it is aware 
of realities, one can find out that there is sati already and that it 
is not necessary to make a special effort for sati. Nothing else can 
be done but gradually developing more understanding of the 
characteristics of realities. 
Someone may feel happy about his understanding or about the arising of 
sati, but then there is clinging and he should get rid of it. One 
should not hope for the arising of sati in the future, neither should 
one cling to sati which has arisen, that is wrong practice. The right 
practice is the development of awareness of realities just as they 
appear naturally. When there is right practice, there is no attachment 
nor aversion with regard to the reality which is appearing, because 
that reality is not "I", mine or self. Not only in this life there is 
clinging to the concept of "I" or self, also in countless past lives 
there was such clinging. How could we then today have immediately 
clear understanding of the characteristics of nåma and rúpa? If there 
has not often been listening to the Dhamma and considering it, it is 
impossible that there is at the moment of awareness of realities 
direct understanding of their arising and falling away. 
When the Buddha taught the Dhamma, there were each time many people 
who penetrated the four noble Truths, but this does not mean that 
every listener could attain enlightenment. Those who attained 
enlightenment to the degree of arahatship were fewer in number than 
those who attained the third stage of enlightenment, the stage of the 
non-returner (anågåmí). Even so, those who became non-returners were 
fewer in number than those who attained the second stage of 
enlightenment, the stage of the once-returner (sakadågåmí), and those 
who became once-returners were fewer in number than those who attained 
the first stage of enlightenment, the stage of the streamwinner 
(sotåpanna). Those who became streamwinners were again fewer in number 
than those who did not attain any stage of enlightenment. Listening 
and considering the Dhamma is never enough, people should continue to 
listen to the Dhamma and consider what they have heard.
When we read the stories about the past lives of the Buddha's 
disciples, we learn that there were people who, although they studied 
the whole Tipiìaka and its commentaries, still did not penetrate the 
four noble Truths. Therefore, it is of no use to wonder when one will 
understand the truth. Besides, people should not ask someone else 
whether they will have right understanding after a long time of 
development or within a short time. Everybody should know with regard 
to himself whether at this moment sati is aware of the realities which 
are appearing, or whether there is no sati. People should know the 
truth about themselves, and they should be sincere with regard to 
their own development. The only way which should be followed is to 
continue developing understanding, little by little. 
Buth Sawong: With regard to the practice of the Dhamma, people who 
have listened to the Dhamma find that realities arise and fall away 
too rapidly. They say that for this reason they cannot clearly 
understand them. They still seem to see beings and persons, not 
visible object, because the different realities arise and fall away 
too rapidly. They feel that they are not fast enough to discern 
different realities. 
Sujin: Are they not fast enough to understand realities, or do they 
not understand them at all ? 
Buth Sawong: They know them as beings, people and self. 
Sujin: Is this a matter of being too slow to understand realities, or 
of just not understanding them at all? 
Buth Sawong: Actually, they do not understand realities, and this is 
not a matter of being too slow to catch them. 
Sujin: That is right. At this moment realities are appearing to all of 
us, because we are not asleep[44]. There is seeing, but is there 
understanding which knows that seeing is a reality which experiences 
something, that there is no "I" who is seeing? That which is 
experienced through the eyes, visible object, is appearing. Is there 
understanding of it already? We should not look for that which appears 
through the eyes, it is there already. At this moment realities are 
appearing, but they are not known as they are. This, however, is not a 
matter of being too slow to catch them. Therefore, people should not 
say that they are too slow to understand dhammas; they have only 
theoretical understanding of the fact that realities arise and fall 
away very rapidly. At this moment realities are arising and falling 
away and it is of no use to think that one is too slow to realize 
this. Only paññå which has been developed can realize the truth of 
impermanence. What has fallen away has fallen away, nobody can alter 
this fact. During the time when someone is thinking that he is too 
slow to realize the falling away of realities, realities still arise 
again and fall away again. The only way which can be followed is 
developing understanding of the characteristic of what appears at this 
very moment, and this does not have to be delayed. This is the way to 
check one's own understanding, to find out whether there is 
understanding of the true nature of realities or not yet. If someone 
gradually has more understanding of realities, it means that paññå is 
developing. 
Does one want to attain enlightenment without knowing as they are the 
characteristics of realities appearing at this moment? That is 
impossible. So long as someone has not penetrated the truth of the 
realities appearing now he should not believe that he will realize the 
four noble Truths, that he will attain nibbåna. Everybody can repeat 
the Dhamma he has heard, he can repeat that realities arise because of 
conditions, and that the realities which have arisen can be 
experienced. However, when at this moment something hard is touched, 
do people have direct understanding of the truth, namely, that 
hardness which is experienced by touch appears because it has arisen, 
and that if hardness does not arise it cannot be experienced by touch? 
Everybody is touching one thing or other and if sati does not arise 
people think that it is a table or a hand which is experienced by 
touch. When sati arises it can be aware of the characteristic of 
hardness, but this does not mean that paññå is able to penetrate the 
true nature of realities immediately. We should remember the Buddha's 
words we read in the scriptures, about being mindful often, again and 
again[45]. Only if there is mindfulness again and again will it be 
understood that hardness is a kind of rúpa, different from the reality 
which experiences hardness, from nåma. When there has been mindfulness 
more often of the characteristics of nåma and rúpa, paññå can become 
keener and reach the degree of insight-knowledge, vipassanå ñåùa, and 
at that moment realities appear as they are. This does not mean, 
however, that the arising and falling away of realities can be 
penetrated immediately. In the course of the development of paññå 
there are different stages of insight-knowledge, and the arising and 
falling away of realities is not penetrated at the first stage of 
insight-knowledge, but at a later stage[46]. When someone believes that he 
can immediately penetrate the arising and falling away of realities he 
is on the wrong way. He should not think of having to be in time to 
"catch" the arising and falling away of realities. He should begin to 
understand the characteristic of the reality which experiences 
something, of nåma, and of the characteristic of the reality which 
does not experience anything, of rúpa. He can begin to be aware of the 
realities appearing through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense 
and mind. There are only six doorways through which realities are 
appearing, but ignorance cannot understand this. 
The Buddha taught the Dhamma in detail for fortyfive years, he taught 
the Vinaya (Book of Discipline for the monks), the Suttanta 
(Discourses) and the Abhidhamma. He taught the Dhamma in so many 
details, because he knew the amount of our ignorance. Realities are 
only nåma and rúpa, but the Buddha taught different aspects of them: 
he taught the four Applications of Mindfulness so that we would be 
able to understand realities as non-self. He taught, for example, the 
Application of Mindfulness of Feeling, so that we would know the truth 
that the different feelings, including happy feeling, unhappy feeling, 
indifferent feeling, pleasant and painful bodily feeling, are not "I", 
not self. We can notice today that there are many kinds of nåma and 
rúpa, realities appearing through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 
bodysense and mind. Feeling arises each time when there is seeing, 
hearing, smelling, tasting, experiencing tangible object or thinking. 
When we take into account the reality of feeling, we see that it is 
manifold, but apart from feeling there are also, for example, lobha 
(attachment), dosa (aversion), jealousy, avarice and many other kinds 
of akusala cetasikas. Besides these there are also many kinds of 
sobhana (beautiful) cetasikas. All these realities which arise time 
and again are dependant on the appropriate conditions. In our daily 
life there is forgetfulness and ignorance when there is no awareness 
of the characteristics of realities which are appearing.
Buth Sawong: I received a question from someone who asked what a 
person who practises satipaììhåna should do when he is near death.
Sujin: There is no "I", no self who can do anything. There are only 
citta, cetasika and rúpa which arise time and again because of their 
appropriate conditions. 
Buth Sawong: When at death rúpa has fallen away, nåma also has fallen 
away. What is it that will be reborn?
Sujin: There will again be the arising of nåma and rúpa. Is it not 
true that just a moment ago nåma and rúpa fell away? 
Buth Sawong: That is true. 
Sujin: Is there again arising of nåma and rúpa?
Buth Sawong: Yes. 
Sujin: Nåma and rúpa arise and then fall away completely according to 
conditions, all the time. If nåma and rúpa would not arise we would 
not be sitting here. 
Buth Sawong: When I and my relatives came to meet you at the airport, 
you said about us that we have paññå. Paññå in what respect?
Sujin: Did your relatives who came to meet me not listen to the Dhamma 
you explained in your lectures?
Buth Sawong: They did. 
Sujin: If they had not gained understanding from listening, would they 
listen again? 
Buth Sawong: They have listened and gained understanding from what 
they heard.
Sujin: That is paññå which understands. 



Glossary

Abhidhammattha Sangaha an Encyclopedia of the Abhidhamma, written by 
	Anuruddha between the 8th and the 12th century A.D.
Åcariya The Påli term for teacher
adosa non aversion
åjíva livelihood
akusala unwholesome, unskilful
alobha non attachment, generosity
amoha wisdom or understanding
anågåmí non returner, person who has reached the third stage of 
	enlightenment, he has no aversion (dosa)
Ånanda the chief attendant of the Buddha 
anantara paccaya contiguity condition 
anattå not self
anumodhanå thanksgiving, appreciation of someone else's kusala
arahat noble person who has attained the fourth and last stage of 
	enlightenment
ariyan noble person who has attained enlightenment
attå self
avijjå ignorance
åyatanas sense-fields, namely the five senses and the mind and the 
	objects experienced by them
bhåvanå mental development, comprising the development of calm and the 
	development of insight
bhavanga-citta life-continuum
bodhisatta a being destined to become a Buddha
Buddha a fully enlightened person who has discovered the truth all by 
	himself, without the aid of a teacher
cetasika mental factor arising with consciousness
citta consciousness, the reality which knows or cognizes an object
dåna generosity, giving
dhamma reality, truth, the teachings
dhåtu element
diììhi wrong view, distorted view of realities
dosa aversion or ill will 
dukkha suffering, unsatisfactoriness of conditioned realities
ekaggatå concentration, one-pointedness, a cetasika which has the 
	function to focus on one object
ganthas bonds, a group of defilements
indriya faculty. Some are rúpas such as the sense organs, some are 
	nåmas such as feeling. Five `spiritual faculties' are 
	wholesome faculties which should be cultivated, namely: 
	confidence, energy, awareness, concentration and wisdom.
kamma intention or volition; deed motivated by volition
kammajå-rúpa rúpa which is originated by kamma
kåya body. It can also stand for the `mental body', the cetasikas
khandhas aggregates of conditioned realities classified as five 
	groups: physical phenomena, feelings, perception or 
	remembrance, activities or formations (cetasikas other than 
	feeling or perception), consciousness.
khaùika maraùa momentary death of a reality
kusala wholesome, skilful
lobha attachment, greed
lokuttara citta supramundane citta which experiences nibbåna
magga path (eightfold Path)
mettå loving kindness
micchå-samådhi wrong concentration 
moha ignorance
moha-múla-citta citta rooted in ignorance
nåma mental phenomena,including those which are conditioned and also 
	the unconditioned nåma which is nibbåna.
ñåùa wisdom, insight
nibbåna unconditioned reality, the reality which does not arise and 
	fall away. The destruction of lust, hatred and delusion. The 
	deathless. The end of suffering.
paccaya condition
Påli the language of the Buddhist teachings
paññå wisdom or understanding
paramattha dhamma  truth in the absolute sense: mental and physical 
	phenomena, each with their own characteristic. 
rúpa physical phenomena, realities which do not experience anything
sacca truth
saddhå confidence
sakadågåmí once-returner, a noble person who has attained the second 
	stage of enlightenment
samådhi concentration or one-pointedness, ekaggatå cetasika
samatha the development of calm
sammå right
Sangha community of monks and nuns. As one of the triple Gems it means 
	the community of those people who have attained enlightenment.
saññå memory, remembrance or "perception"
saòkåra dhamma conditioned dhamma
sati awareness, non-forgetfulness, awareness of reality by direct 
	experience
satipaììhåna applicatioms of mindfulness. It can mean the cetasika 
	sati which is aware of realities or the objects of mindfulness 
	which are classified as four applications of mindfulness: 
	Body, Feeling Citta, Dhamma. Or it can mean the development of 
	direct understanding of realities through awareness.
síla morality in action or speech, virtue
sílabbata-paråmåså wrong practice
sobhana (citta and cetasika) beautiful, accompanied by beautiful roots
sota-viññåùa hearing-consciousness
sotåpanna person who has attained the first stage of enlightenment, 
	and who has eradicated wrong view of realities
sukha happy, pleasant
sutta part of the scriptures containing dialogues at different places 
	on different occasions.
suttanta a sutta text
Tipiìaka the teachings of the Buddha
upekkhå indifferent feeling. It can stand for evenmindedness or 
	equanimity and then it is not feeling
våcí speech
vedanå feeling
vedanånupassanå satipaììhåna mindfulness of feeling
vinaya Book of Discipline for the monks
viññåùa consciousness, citta
vipåkacitta citta which is the result of a wholesome deed (kusala 
	kamma) or an unwholesome deed (akusala kamma). It can arise as 
	rebirth-consciousness, or during life as the experience of 
	pleasant or unpleasant objects through the senses, such as 
	seeing, hearing, etc.
vipassanå wisdom which sees realities as they are
Visuddhimagga an encyclopaedia of the Buddha's teaching, written by 
	Buddhaghosa in the fifth century A.D
vitakka applied thinking


Buddhist Phrases

From discussions with Sujin Boriharnwanaket 
and Phra Dhammadhara

If one does not realise yet that one has wrong understanding, it is 
impossible to develop right understanding.

The beginning is understanding the characteristic of awareness 
correctly.

Some people are afraid to watch TV, but now we are lost in the 
concepts with no awareness.

One takes subtle attachment for calmness because of lack of 
understanding of calmness.

Life is so short, so fragile. Get rid of attachment.

Always burning with lobha, dosa, moha ¤renunciation with satipatthana¤

Understand accumulations from moment to moment.

Right action is abstaining from wrong action. There must be awareness 
of a nåma or rúpa to be right action of the eightfold path.

The aim of thinking about concepts in the right way is to know more 
about realities.

Seeing sees visible object. What is seen is not a person. We have 
attachment to individuals, but individuality has no separate 
characteristic.
If you think you are so clever and others don't think so, you feel 
sorry. Attachment to self brings sorrow.

Aversion prevents listening.

The understanding that begins to know conditioned realities is also 
conditioned.

The arising of any conditioned reality is dukkha because of its 
arising. If there is no arising, there is no dukkha. If there is no 
awareness of the reality now, how can one understand the absolute 
reality of dukkha?

The arising happens because there is passing away of previous moments. 
Once there is no arising there can be total peace and calm.

Can you tell what is beyond this moment?

If there is no thinking of this or that concept, can there be concept 
at this moment?

The game of life that tanha always wins.

Don't be a victim of the conceptual system, but the conqueror of your 
ignorance.


When there is dosa, there is strong lobha somewhere that has 
conditioned it.

Propagating wrong view is the most dangerous thing to do.

Don't force yourself to think it is the right time and right place for 
the arising of awareness, because awareness can arise anytime or 
place. Don't limit it.
At the moment of developing right understanding, there is real rest no 
matter what one is doing.
Without satipaììhåna, there is always cling to self, always wanting 
the best for self, even wanting more understanding.

We think it's enough listening so now we need time and place for the 
development, but in reality it's never enough listening.

We don't understand the game of taùhå (craving), so we follow it 
wherever it goes.

The Buddha taught us to listen to dhamma, not people.

Let go of desire and attachment for other objects that do not appear 
now. When there's awareness, there's letting go.

The Buddha taught everyone to have kusala citta at any moment, at any 
level, because to have kusala citta at any moment is so helpful.

Right understanding brings detachment. If there is even a little 
attachment, it hinders the progress of right understanding.

Samatha doesn't get rid of concepts.

As understanding grows, it grows beyond the level of thinking of 
sammuti sacca and knows the difference between paramattha sacca and 
sammuti sacca (concept) instead of clinging to sammuti sacca and 
taking for self.

We must be brave enough to study with panna any reality. We need to be 
brave to begin to study visible object as visible object.
It is kindness to others if we don't cling to them or encourage them 
to be attached to us.

The test is at this moment. Test now...Visual object now is the test 
of whether one has understanding or whether there should be more 
understanding developed.

With understanding and awareness of calmness, calmness grows.

The world of paramattha sacca is the world of understanding reality as 
it is.

One is burnt by one's desire all the time. In reality one is attached 
to one's feeling, not really the person...

Attachment is only a conditioned moment. Attachment is like a trap or 
a bait.

One kills oneself and one's heart by one's attachment and ignorance. 
We are trapped, lured by attachment all the time. It's truly poisonous.

We are cut up with sammuti sacca when there is no awareness of 
thinking.

There are different conditions for different namas and rupas. With 
more understanding of different conditions you will see that there is 
no self.

It needs right understanding to know whether this moment is kusala or 
akusala.


Other Publications


The Buddha's Path 
By Nina van Gorkom

Explains the basic principles of Buddhism to those who have no 
previous experience and knowledge of this way of life. The four noble 
Truths - suffering - the origin of suffering - the cessation of 
suffering - and the way leading to the end of suffering - are 
explained as a philosophy and a practical guidance which can be 
followed in today's world. The contents include: the Buddha's life, 
the truth of suffering, the truth of non-self, the mind, deeds and 
their results, good deeds and a wholesome life, meditation and the 
Eightfold Path. 1994, paperback, 150 pages, 140mm x 210mm, ISBN 1 
897633 12 2, price £7.95. 


Buddhism in Daily Life 
By Nina van Gorkom
A general introduction to the main ideas of Theravåda Buddhism. The 
purpose of this book is to help the reader gain insight into the 
Buddhist scriptures and the way in which the teachings can be used to 
benefit both ourselves and others in everyday life. Several chapters 
are written in the form of question and answer, inspired by questions 
posed by ordinary people who were confronted with difficulties in the 
practical application of the teachings. The book will be an invaluable 
aid for those individuals who wish to develop the Buddhist path to 
true understanding. Suitable for both practising Buddhists and 
newcomers to the teachings. ISBN 1 897633 16 5, 192 pages, paperback, 
135mm x 210mm, price £7.95


Mettå: loving kindness in Buddhism
By Sujin Boriharnwanaket
An introduction to the basic Buddhist teachings of metta, loving 
kindness, and its practical application in today's world. It shows 
metta as the "foundation of the world" essential for peace and 
happiness of both ourselves and others. It gives guidance to its 
development, explaining conditions for it and impediments to it. And 
shows the importance of the Buddhist meditation practice of insight 
for its development. 1995
ISBN 1 897633 14 9, 128 pages, paperback, 210mm x 135mm, price £7.95.


The World in the Buddhist Sense
By Nina van Gorkom
Explains the realities in and around ourselves. Analyses the 
difference between the development of calm and the development of 
insight. Discusses the meditation practice of "mindfulness of 
breathing". Illustrates with many quotes from the Påli Tipiìaka. 
Suitable for those who have a background of Buddhism but who seek a 
deeper understanding. October 1993, 123 pp, paperback, 210mm x 140mm. 
ISBN 1 897633 11 4, price £7.95.


Abhidhamma in Daily Life 
By Nina van Gorkom
We live mostly in a changing world of ideas. We are caught up in 
concepts. What is real and important can be lost as we strive to 
compete. Abhidhamma in Daily Life goes straight to the heart of 
Buddhist doctrine. It defines what is real with the aim of freeing us 
from the daily rat race. 

The purpose of the book is to give a fundamental understanding of the 
five senses: seeing, hearing, touching, tasting, smelling and the all 
important sixth sense, the mind. Only when we truly understand these 
six senses can we begin to comprehend what is important and truly 
real. 

Abhidhamma in Daily Life shows us how to apply the basic precepts of 
Buddhist teaching in our daily life which will impact not only on 
ourselves, but also on those around us. It cuts through the 
complexities of the original text, the Påli Tipiìaka, simplifying the 
scriptures without losing their meaning. Many Påli terms are used, but 
they are defined as they are introduced making it suitable for the 
beginner as well as practising Buddhists.

Abhidhamma in Daily Life is a vital key for unlocking the deep meaning 
of the Buddha's teachings and the Buddhist way of life.
ISBN 1 897633 17 3, 272 pages, paperback, 135mm x 216mm, price £11.95, 
US $17.95.



Cetasikas
by Nina van Gorkom

Cetasika means `belonging to the mind'. It is a mental factor which 
accompanies consciousness (citta) and experiences an object. There are 
52 cetasikas. This book gives an outline of each of these 52 cetasikas 
and shows the relationship they have with each other. It will help the 
student have more understanding of the intricate operations of the 
mind enabling the development of  good qualities and the eventual 
eradication of all defilements. It will help to understand that citta 
and cetasika act according to their own conditions and that an abiding 
agent (soul or self) is not to be found. The book assumes some 
previous knowlege of Buddhism. 

First edition, author: Nina van Gorkom, ISBN 1897633 18 1, 416 pages, 
216mm x 135mm, hardback, 
price £24, Publication date 1st April 1999.

-----

[1] The word "dhamma" has several meanings. It can mean the Buddha's 
teaching, but in a wider sense dhamma is everything that is real. 
Citta, cetasika and rúpa are dhammas, realities, which each have their 
own characteristic.  
[2] The rúpa which is bodysense is all over the the body. It is capable 
of receiving tangible object which impinges on it, such as the rúpas 
which are hardness, softness, heat, cold, motion or pressure.   
[3] Ariyans are those who have realized the truth of realities and 
attained enlightenment. We read about the world in the ariyan 
discipline in the Kindred Sayings IV, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Second 
Fifty, Ch 4, § 84, Transitory.  
[4] Attå means self and saññå is the cetasika, mental factor arising with 
the citta, which is remembrance. Saññå arises with each citta and it 
remembers or recognizes the object which is experienced. Saññå can be 
kusala, akusala or neither kusala nor akusala. When saññå is wrong 
remembrance of self it is akusala, it remembers in a distorted way.
[5] The body is constituted of rúpas which arise in groups or units. Each 
group consists of several kinds of rúpas and among these are the four 
"great elements" of solidity, cohesion, heat, and motion.  
[6] Conditioned realities can be classified as five khandhas: 
rúpa-kkhandha, the aggregate of  physical phenomena, vedanå-kkhandha, 
the aggregate of feelings, saññå-kkhandha, the aggregate of 
remembrance, saòkhåra-kkhandha, the aggregate of all cetasikas other 
than feeling and remembrance, and viññåùa-kkhandha, the aggregate of 
cittas. There are twelve åyatanas or bases, which are: the 
sense-organs and the mind-base (cittas), the five objects experienced 
through the senses and mind-object.  
[7] In Påli there is a word-association between  cinteti, thinking, and 
citta. 
[8] There are many ways realities can be a condition for other realities. 
Some realities arise at the same time as the  realities they 
condition, others do not.   
[9]  Bhavanga-cittas or life-continuum arise in between the processes of 
cittas. These cittas do not experience objects impinging on the 
sense-doors or the mind-door.   
[10] Rúpa lasts longer than citta, thus, it can arise before a sense-door 
process of cittas begins and be experienced by the cittas arising in 
that process.      
[11] Rúpas of the body originate from either one of these four factors, 
but rúpas outside only originate from temperature. 
[12] Kamma produces throughout life for example the rúpas which are the 
sense organs. 
[13] As regards rúpa produced by citta, when we are angry we can notice a 
change in our facial expression. In that case the dosa-múla-citta 
produces rúpas. When there is kusala citta with loving kindness our 
facial expression is different again; it is kusala citta which 
produces rúpas. As regards nutrition which produces rúpas, we can 
sometimes notice that good food or bad food  affects the body.  
[14]  Each citta arises and falls away and is succeeded immediately, 
without any interval, by the next citta. Rúpas which fall away are not 
contiguity condition for following rúpas. Rúpas of the body are 
replaced so long as there are conditions for the production of new 
rúpas by either one of the four factors of kamma, citta, nutrition or 
temperature. 
[15]  The development of satipaììhåna or the development of the eightfold 
Path is the development of right understanding of nåma and rúpa by 
mindfulness of them when they appear at the present moment. 
[16] The perfections are: generosity, morality, renunciation, wisdom, 
energy, patience, truthfulness, determination, loving kindness and 
equanimity. 
[17] These are the wholesome cetasikas of confidence, energy, mindfulness, 
concentration and wisdom. They are "indriyas"or controlling faculties, 
they can "control" the defilements which are their opposites. 
[18] The Truth of dukkha, the Truth of the origination of dukkha, which is 
craving, the Truth of the cessation of dukkha, which is nibbåna, and 
the Truth of the Path leading to the cessation of dukkha. Dukkha or 
suffering is in this context the unsatisfactoriness due to the 
impermanence of conditioned realities. 
[19] At the attainment of enlightenment the lokuttara citta, supramundane 
citta, arises which experiences nibbåna. There are four stages of 
enlightenment and at these stages defilements are progressively 
eradicated. These stages are: the stage of the sotåpanna or 
streamwinner, the stage of the sakadågåmí or once-returner, the stage 
of the anågåmí or non-returner, and the stage of the arahat, the 
perfected one, who has eradicated all defilements. At each stage there 
is the arising of the magga-citta or path-consciousness which 
eradicates defilements, and the phala-citta or fruition-consciousness, 
which is the vipåkacitta or result, produced by the magga-citta.  
[20] sacca means real or true. 
[21] "All dhammas" include conditioned realities and also the 
unconditioned reality, nibbåna. 
[22]  The sotåpanna has to continue to develop paññå in order to attain 
higher stages of enlightenment. When the stage of the arahat has been 
reached there will be no more rebirth. This means the end of dukkha. 
[23] The three Gems of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. 
[24]  Person  or thing are concepts one can think of; they do not impinge 
on the eyesense, they cannot be seen. 
[25] Seeing, hearing, smelling and tasting are vipåkacittas (cittas which 
are results of kamma) , which are accompanied by indifferent feeling. 
[26] Lobha can be accompanied by happy feeling or by indifferent feeling. 
[27] Kusala citta can be accompanied by happy feeling or by indifferent 
feeling. 
[28] Defilements are progressively eradicated at the attainment of the 
different stages of enlightenment, and at the attainment of arahatship 
all of them are eradicated. 
[29] These three characteristics are: impermanence, dukkha and anattå, 
non-self. 
[30] The sangha means the order of monks, but as one of the three refuges 
it is the ariyan sangha, the community of enlightened ones.  
[31] The Påli term for teacher. 
[32] Rules of  wholesome conduct.
[33]  This is the Påli term for thanksgiving or satisfaction. By this word 
one's appreciation of someone else's good deeds is expressed. 
[34] The first kind of people are called in Påli: ugghaìitaññú, and the 
second kind: vipacitaññú. The first and the second kind of people 
attain enlightenment quickly, they cannot be found today. There are 
also people who penetrate the truth after having asked questions and 
considered the Dhamma for a longer period of time, and they are 
called: neyya puggala, people who need guidance. Those who, although 
they heard much and considered much, do not attain enlightenment are 
called pada-parama, which means: those whose highest attainment are 
the words (of the texts). 
[35]  Right thinking has the function of "touching" the nåma or rúpa which 
appears, it assists right understanding so that it can know its true 
nature.  
[36]  These three cetasikas have the function of abstaining from wrong 
speech, wrong action and wrong livelihood. When enlightenment is 
attained they have the function of eradicating the causes of wrong 
speech, wrong action and wrong livelihood.  
[37]   Concentration has the function of focussing on one object and it 
arises with each citta. As regards right concentration of the 
eightfold Path, when there is awareness of a nåma or rúpa, 
sammå-samådhi has the function of focussing on that one object so that 
right understanding can understand it as it is. As regards right 
effort, this is the cetasika viriya, energy or effort. It has the 
function of strenghtening the citta and accompanying cetasikas, so 
that they can perform their functions. Right effort strengthens the 
other factors, so that there is courage and perseverance with the 
development of right understanding.   
[38]  When there is mindfulness of realities appearing through six doors 
there is restraint of the six doors, there is no opportunity for 
akusala. This also means that there is calm at that moment. Sati can 
prevent one from committing akusala kamma and also from akusala which 
is of a lesser degree. Thus, at the moment of right mindfulness there 
is the threefold higher training: training in higher síla, higher calm 
and higher paññå. Training is the translation of the Påli term sikkhå. 
Training means applying oneself again and again.    
[39] An encyclopedia on Buddhism written by the great commentator 
Buddhaghosa, in the fifth century A.D. 
[40]  Rúpas arise in groups or units of rúpas. There are different kinds 
of rúpas and the four Great Elements always have to arise together 
with each kind of rúpa. Sound, for example, could not arise without 
the four Great Elements. 
[41] The cetasika which is remembrance, arising with each citta. Because 
of saññå we can recognize things.  
[42]  Vedanå means feeling. Anupassanå means viewing, contemplating, 
consideration.   
[43] There were other Buddhas before the Buddha Gotama. The Buddha Gotama 
was in one of his former lives the brahman Sumedha, aeons ago. In that 
life he aspired to be a future Buddha. 
[44]  When we are fast asleep and not dreaming, there are bhavanga-cittas 
or life-continuum. These cittas do not arise within processes of 
cittas which experience objects through the six doors. 
[45]  See for example the Satpaììhåna Sutta, Middle Length Saings I, 10, 
where it is said after each section of Mindfulness of the Body, "Thus 
he lives contemplating the body in the body...", and after the other 
sections, that he lives contemplating feelings in the feelings, citta 
in citta, dhammas in dhammas. 
[46]  At the first stage the difference between the characteristic of nåma 
and the characteristic of rúpa is clearly distinguished. 
