From our childhood we are used to the idea that this world we are 
living in with all the people around us is the real world. The Buddha 
taught that the world is composed of the objects which come to us 
through the senses of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense and through 
the door of the mind. These are all fleeting phenomena which change 
within splitseconds. Seeing is there just for a moment and then it 
falls away. Visible object is there just for a moment and then it 
falls away. What we used to take for our solid world consists of 
impermanent elements. Our world crumbles away, there is the 
disintegration of our world and of ourselves.
When the reader is in the first page of this book confronted with two 
different kinds of truths, the conventional truth and the absolute 
truth, he may wonder whether there is a discrepancy here which makes 
it impossible to practise Buddhism and at the same time to live one's 
life in the world. We have to do our work, to be with other people and 
we want to enjoy our possessions, all the things of this world. The 
Buddha did not deny that there is the conventional truth we have to 
live with. However, it is a great blessing that he taught us the 
absolute truth, the truth of mental phenomena, nåma, and physical 
phenomena, rúpa. Nåma and rúpa are terms in Påli, the language in 
which the Buddhist scriptures have been written. We can develop 
understanding of the absolute truth, of nåma and rúpa, while we live 
our daily life naturally. Absolute truth is not a truth which cannot 
be grasped, it is not something abstract, it is the truth about daily 
realities. Understanding this truth will help us to be able to lead 
our life in the world in a more wholesome way and to face 
contrarieties in our work, and in our relationships.
How to develop understanding of nåma and rúpa naturally, while we are 
eating, doing our daily tasks, doing everything we normally do? This 
was the topic of the letters I wrote while living in Tokyo to someone 
who was wondering how to develop right understanding of nåma and rúpa 
in daily life. The Buddha taught mindfulness, in Påli: sati, of the 
nåma and rúpa of our life, in order to acquire direct understanding of 
them. We discussed what sati is; it is difficult for all of us to 
understand this reality which seems so elusive. Sati is different from 
thinking, but what is it then? We have to accept that we cannot 
understand immediately what sati is, we have to study carefully all 
the phenomena of our life the Buddha taught. We need knowledge of them 
as a foundation. Gradually we can learn to investigate the nåmas and 
rúpas which appear in our life and then there can be conditions for 
direct awareness of them, for sati.
The reader may wonder what the purpose is of the study of nåma and 
rúpa. Why should one take so much trouble? It is important to have 
less ignorance about our life, about ourselves. The real cause of all 
our troubles is not the behaviour of other people or the situation we 
are in, but our own defilements. Our ignorance conditions many other 
defilements, such as selfishness, hatred, avarice and jealousy. 
Through the development of understanding there will be elimination of 
ignorance. When there is less ignorance it will be for the benefit of 
both ourselves and others. The development of understanding can only 
be very gradual. We need patience to investigate all phenomena which 
appear. At first we may believe that we know already what phenomena 
such as seeing, hearing or thinking are, but gradually it will dawn on 
us how ignorant we are of the most common phenomena of our life. That 
is the right beginning. We are hearing sounds the whole day, but what 
do we know about hearing? We may have thought that we can hear and 
define the sound or recognize what we hear all at the same time. 
Hearing is one moment, and knowing the meaning of what we hear such as 
the meaning of words are other moments. The reader may wonder why it 
is important to know this. It is important, because defilements arise 
immediately on account of what we experience through the senses. We 
ought to learn more about our defilements and the way they are 
conditioned. We hear pleasant and unpleasant sounds and after that, 
when we know the meaning and think about what was heard, we 
immediately react to it either in a negative way, or in a positive 
way. There may be unwholesome moments of clinging or aversion, or 
there may be wholesome moments of patience and wisdom. All this 
happens so quickly, within splitseconds, it is actually beyond 
control. When we investigate such processes in our life we can 
experience ourselves that there are many different nåmas which are 
beyond control. We cannot create our own hearing, nor can we direct 
the way we react, it has happened already when we realize it. The 
Buddha taught that nåma and rúpa arise because of their own 
conditioning factors. For example, when one reacts with patience to 
harsh sounds one can do so because it is in one's character to react 
in that way. Such inclination has already been accumulated. This is an 
example which illustrates that there is not one mind, but many 
different mental phenomena which change all the time.
We may wonder why we also have to learn about physical phenomena, 
rúpas. Is it necessary to learn so many details? Rúpas affect us very 
much all the time. We cling to pleasant rúpas and we dislike 
unpleasant rúpas. Through the ears the rúpa which is sound is 
experienced by hearing-consciousness. When we hear harsh words it is 
only sound which is heard, only the rúpa which impinges on the 
earsense. However, we think with anger or sadness about an unkind 
person who spoke harsh words, we think in a negative, unwholesome way 
and this happens most of the time. In the absolute sense there is no 
person who speaks unkind words. The moments of consciousness which 
motivated his speaking are only fleeting moments, they have fallen 
away but we keep thinking about his unkindness. There is no person, no 
self who hears, hearing arises only for a moment and then it falls 
away. The sound which is heard is only a kind of rúpa which does not 
last. Right understanding of the objects we experience through the six 
doors will eventually lead to more patience. The effect will be that 
we are less inclined to feel hurt by what others say to us and that we 
will be able to forgive more easily.
The Buddha taught the impermanence of the phenomena of our life. We 
may believe that we know already that our body is subject to decay and 
that our thoughts and feelings change. We can think of impermanence 
but this is not the same as the direct knowledge of the changes from 
moment to moment of nåma and rúpa. A very precise knowledge of nåma 
and rúpa has to be developed so that later on their arising and 
falling away, their impermanence, can be directly experienced. When 
one has come to that stage there will be less enslavement to the 
objects one experiences. However, this is a learning process which has 
to continue for a long time, even longer than this life. There is no 
quick result, no shortcut.
The person who wrote to me wanted to create particular situations in 
order to have more mindfulness. He thought that concentration on 
breathing would help him to reach the goal sooner. In Letter 6 and 7, 
I deal with mindfulness of breathing. There are many misunderstandings 
about this subject. When one concentrates on breathing one may be able 
to eliminate worry for those moments, one cannot think of anything 
else when one thinks of breathing. However, there is right 
concentration and wrong concentration, as I tried to explain in these 
letters. When there is right concentration there is calm which is 
wholesome and when there is wrong concentration there is unwholesome 
consciousness. When one clings to a quick result there is wrong 
concentration. I deal with this subject and quote from the commentary, 
the Visuddhimagga, in order to show how complex this subject is. If 
one does not know precisely the way of development of mindfulness of 
breathing there is wrong concentration and this is useless. It is 
already a gain when one understands that mindfulness of breathing is 
not just sitting and trying to concentrate on breath without knowing 
anything.
The Buddha taught that nåma and rúpa are impermanent and not self. 
What we take for a person or a self are only fleeting elements. When 
we begin to develop understanding of nåma and rúpa we have not 
eliminated the idea of self. There is still another person who speaks 
harsh words to us, and there is still "self" who hears them and is 
angry. The fact that we think in this way is conditioned by 
remembrance of past experiences, we always thought in that way. Also 
thinking is a conditioned nåma, it is a reality. The person we think 
of is not an absolute reality but a conventional reality. We do not 
have to behave in an artificial way while we develop understanding of 
phenomena, but while we answer back to someone who speaks to us there 
can be a short moment in between of realising the truth that whatever 
we say or do is conditioned, that it is not "I". We are not used to 
such an approach, but gradually it can be learnt if we see its 
benefit. When we do not want to mislead ourselves about the fleeting 
phenomena of our life right understanding can begin to develop, it 
develops, there is no self who develops it. We may feel happy or sad, 
just as we used to, but in between understanding of such phenomena can 
very gradually be accumulated.
We can learn from our own experience the difference between the 
moments we are living in the world of conventional realities, the 
world of self, people and possessions, and the moments there is one 
nåma or rúpa appearing through one of the six doorways. We usually 
live with our illusions and dreams, we are led by the outward 
appearance of things and we are ignorant of what is really going on 
within us or around us. We look at our surroundings and at other 
people and we make our own mental pictures of what we observe. We are 
all different, with different inclinations, and this conditions the 
way we see the people and things around us. Each of us lives in his 
own world of thinking. We live most of the time in our own world of 
thinking, but through the study of the Buddha's teachings we begin to 
understand the difference between imaginations and realities.
The Buddha taught that there is no person, no self who can exert 
control over nåma and rúpa, they are beyond control. It may be 
difficult to accept this since we want to control our life. When there 
is seeing which experiences a pleasant visible object there is 
attachment to this object immediately. When there is seeing which 
experiences an unpleasant object there is aversion to this object 
immediately. The Buddha taught about realities in detail. A very 
precise knowledge of the different realities should be developed. Then 
we will find out that there are many more unwholesome moments, moments 
of attachment, aversion and ignorance, than we ever thought. These 
moments arise because of their own conditions but there can be the 
development of understanding of them. When understanding has been 
fully developed unwholesomeness can be eradicated, but that is a long 
way off. Even though the final goal is a long way off it is valuable 
to develop understanding. When there is a short moment of 
understanding we learn to see that there is only a nåma or only a 
rúpa, and consequently we will be less inclined to see them as very 
important. Understanding will condition more even-mindedness. 
Gradually we will learn to see nåma and rúpa as they are: impermanent 
and not self.
The reader may wonder why I use Påli terms. The Buddhist teachings are 
contained in the Tipiìaka, the three "Baskets" which are the Vinaya 
(the book of discipline for the monks), the Suttanta (discourses), and 
the Abhidhamma, which deals with absolute realities in detail. The 
Scriptures as they have come to us date from the Buddha's time, the 
sixth century B.C. and they are in the Påli language. I have also 
quoted from the Visuddhimagga which is a summary of the teachings 
written by Buddhaghosa in the beginning of the fifth century A.D. In 
different English translations of the texts the Påli terms have been 
rendered differently and thus confusion may arise as to which reality 
has been referred to by which term. The Buddha's teaching of realities 
is very precise and therefore it is useful to learn some of the Påli 
terms which represent these realities. In the back of this book is a 
glossary to help the reader. The reader should not be discouraged by 
the Påli terms. When one continues to study one will find that they 
are helpful for a more precise understanding of what the Buddha taught 
about all the different phenomena which occur right now.
The scriptures are deep in meaning and it is difficult to understand 
the application of the Buddha's teachings. Therefore I feel deep 
gratitude to Ms. Sujn in Thailand, who helped me to understand the 
Buddha's teachings and pointed to me the way to develop understanding 
of realities in daily life. Without such a good friend in Dhamma one 
will easily misunderstand the scriptures and apply them in the wrong 
way. I also wish to express my appreciation to the "Dhamma Study and 
Propagation Foundation" and to the publisher Alan Weller. Without 
their help the publication of this book would not have been possible. 
While we study we should not forget the purpose of our study. The 
purpose is not theoretical knowledge, but direct understanding of our 
own life, of all our wholesome moments and unwholesome moments, all 
the nåmas and rúpas occurring at this moment. When we learn more about 
the conditions for these phenomena we will begin to see that they are 
beyond control, not self. The Buddha's message to us is to investigate 
the truth and to prove the truth through developing direct 
understanding, and this understanding can eradicate ignorance and all 
other defilements. May the reader investigate the truth himself!




Nina van Gorkom
				Tokyo								
15 January 							
1971 
Dear Mr. G., 

You asked me questions about mindfulness in daily life. You said that 
you can be aware while shaving, but that you are not yet sure about 
the experience of different characteristics of nåma (mental phenomena) 
and rúpa (physical phenomena). I would like to quote from the Kindred 
Sayings (IV, Saîåyatana-vagga, Second Fifty, Chapter IV, § 84, 
Transitory). We read that Ånanda asked the Buddha what the world is:

"The world! The world!" is the saying, lord. Pray, how far, lord, does 
this saying go? 
What is transitory by nature, Ånanda, is called "the world" in the 
Ariyan discipline. And what, Ånanda, is transitory by nature? The eye, 
Ånanda, is transitory by nature¤objects¤tongue¤mind is transitory by 
nature, mind-states, mind-consciousness, mind-contact, whatsoever 
pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling or indifferent feeling arises 
owing to mind-contact, that also is transitory by nature. What is thus 
transitory, Ånanda, is called "the world" in the Ariyan discipline.

We cannot yet directly experience the impermanence of nåma and rúpa, 
but we will know the "world in the sense of the ariyan discipline" if 
we develop right understanding of absolute realities, paramattha 
dhammas, by being mindful of their characteristics as they appear one 
at a time through the six doorways.
We are used to thinking that there are the world of our work, of our 
home, of meditation, so many kinds of worlds. Actually we should 
consider what the realities are which can be directly experienced. 
These are the nåma and rúpa which appear through the six doors. There 
is seeing-consciousness, which experiences visible object through the 
eye-door. There is hearing-consciousness which experiences sound 
through the ear-door. There is smelling-consciousness which 
experiences odour through the nose. There is tasting-consciousness 
which experiences flavour through the tongue. There is 
body-consciousness which experiences tangible object through the 
body-door. There is mind-consciousness which experiences mind-objects 
through the mind-door. Thus, there are actually six worlds appearing 
through the six doors. It will take a long time to develop a clearer 
understanding of the six worlds. Thinking about them is not enough. In 
being mindful of different characteristics we will come to understand 
"the world in the sense of the ariyan discipline" through our own 
experience.
Coming back to your example of shaving, you notice different moments. 
Can you notice that there are different realities with different 
characteristics? When you look into the mirror, touch the razor, when 
you are thinking , could you simply, without any need to "detect" nåma 
and rúpa, just realize that these different moments are different 
experiences which have different characteristics ? We should know that 
there are different realities. When you are looking into the mirror is 
there no seeing? It experiences just what appears through the 
eyesense, visible object. When you close your eyes the reality which 
appeared when you were looking does not appear anymore. Considering 
this is the first step to know what realities are. Later on one will 
learn more through direct experience.
You write that you experience "touching the razor". Which realities 
appear? Cold, motion or hardness? These are physical phenomena which 
can be experienced through touch. Or does a nåma appear which 
experiences one of these rúpas? Can you realize that they have 
different characteristics? This will help you to know the world in the 
ariyan sense.
When you eat breakfast you touch the fork. We call it "fork", but what 
can you directly experience through the bodysense? The rúpas which are 
cold, hardness or motion? You can learn that, no matter whether we 
touch a razor or a fork, rúpas such as cold, hardness or motion can be 
experienced through the bodysense. It is not you who experiences them, 
but only a type of nåma which experiences them. Through the eyesense 
the rúpa which is visible object or colour can be experienced. The 
world of tangible object is different from the world appearing through 
the eyesense.
You might say, "But I experience the razor and the fork. I know when I 
touch the razor and when I touch the fork." How do you know what is a 
razor and what is a fork? Because of remembrance or perception, saññå, 
a mental factor, cetasika, which arises with every moment of 
consciousness, citta. There isn't any experience which is not 
accompanied by saññå. Because of saññå we remember things, we remember 
what different things are used for. We remember, "when we do this, it 
has that effect". Saññå is another reality, it is a kind of nåma, not 
self.
In the "absolute sense", or, in the "ariyan discipline", there is no 
fork, no razor, no mirror; these are only ideas we can think of, but 
they are not realities. When there is seeing, it is visible object 
which is experienced; when there is touching, it is hardness, coldness 
or another rúpa presenting itself through the bodysense , which is 
experienced. When we remember that we call a particular thing a "fork" 
or a "razor", or when we remember how to use them, the reality 
presenting itself at that moment is a kind of nåma. Realities are 
experienced through the six doorways, presenting themselves one at a 
time. They are not a person, not a thing which can stay, they are nåma 
and rúpa which arise and then fall away immediately. This is the truth 
which can be directly experienced, this is the "world" in the ariyan 
discipline.
Is this not more simple than you would have thought at first? There is 
thinking when you are shaving. Is that not different from seeing , 
from touching? Attachment or aversion may arise on account of what is 
experienced. Are these not realities different from seeing, from 
visible object, from the experience of tangible object or from the 
rúpas which are experienced through the bodysense? It would be helpful 
to realize that all these realities which appear are different, that 
they have different characteristics. They are nåma and rúpa which 
arise because of conditions, not self. We cling so much to concepts 
and ideas which we convey to others by means of conventional terms in 
language. We cling to saññå, we are infatuated with all the ideas and 
stories we remember, such as razor, fork, person. This blinds us to 
the world in the ariyan sense. It prevents us from understanding nåma 
and rúpa as they present themselves through the six doors, one at a 
time.
You wrote that you often wake up with mindfulness. I often wake up 
with attachment, lobha, or aversion, dosa. For example, I think, "What 
difficult thing do I have to do today?" Sometimes I have to hear 
unpleasant words from other people, and then I feel unhappy. Why? 
Because at those moments I do not see the world in the ariyan sense. 
When we hear unpleasant words, the hearing is only vipåka (citta which 
is result of kamma), it is nåma which arises just for a moment and 
then falls away immediately. When I have aversion, there is akusala 
citta (unwholesome consciousness), which is another kind of nåma. In 
the ariyan sense there is no "I"who experiences, there is no 
experiencer. There is not this or that person who says unpleasant 
words to me. There are only nåma and rúpa. There is seeing, hearing, 
thinking and other phenomena which appear for a moment and are then 
gone. There are different feelings arising because of different 
conditions. The teachings are very helpful for the understanding of 
our life. When we listen to the sutta texts we can be reminded to be 
aware of realities.
You find that there is more awareness when you do things which do not 
require so much attention, things which are done automatically, like 
shaving. You wrote "Shaving is there. It presents itself as if done by 
someone else."
"Shaving is there", these are words you use to describe a whole 
situation you can think of, but which are the realities you can 
directly experience? There is the world in the ariyan sense: different 
phenomena presenting themselves through the six doors. Seeing, 
touching or thinking are realities, but shaving is not a reality. 
"Shaving presents itself as if done by someone else". What is this? It 
is a thought, that is all. We should not cling to special sensations, 
they are only nåmas which do not stay. Thinking is only one kind of 
reality which appears, and then there are other realities.
Is it true that there is more awareness when we do things which do not 
require much attention? At the Japanese school I have to be attentive 
to the teacher who asks me questions in Japanese which I have to 
answer, applying the grammar I learnt. We should not exclude 
beforehand the arising of awareness in such situations. If there can 
be awareness sometimes of different realities one can begin to develop 
understanding of them. Mindfulness arises when there are conditions 
for its arising and we cannot say beforehand, "In such circumstances 
it will arise, in such circumstances it will not arise". Awareness is 
anattå, not self. We may think that it cannot arise in particular 
circumstances, but this is only our thinking. We should realize such a 
moment of thinking as only a kind of nåma which arises because of 
conditions.
Sati, mindfulness, of the Eightfold Path will not arise often when it 
has not been accumulated enough yet. We may take for mindfulness what 
is actually only a sensation of quietness and "some notion of what is 
going on", as you write. But this is not knowing a characteristic of a 
reality which appears through one of the six doors, it is merely 
pondering at leisure.
When hardness is experienced through touch we may take for sati what 
is actually attachment. Do we wish to have many moments of sati? Then 
we are clinging and right understanding cannot develop. Our aim should 
be to learn more about the realities which appear one at a time. We 
cling to visible object, sound and all the other sense objects. We may 
not notice it that we cling to them, but is it not true that we are 
usually absorbed by these objects and think about them for a long 
time? We think that we see people and different things, but we can 
learn that what appears through eyes is only visible object. We think 
that we hear the voice of someone, but what appears through the ears 
is only sound, there is no person in the sound. We can learn to 
consider the phenomena of our daily life as only different realities 
which appear one at a time.
There can be "study" of visible object, sound, hearing and other 
realities when they appear one at a time. The word "study" is 
appropriate, because it is a learning process. It is not theoretical 
study but study of nåma and rúpa in daily life. We should not have 
expectations about the arising of clear, direct understanding of nåma 
and rúpa. When there are expectations there is attachment to an idea 
of self who is successful, whereas mindfulness and right understanding 
should lead to detachment from the idea of self. We should remember 
that mindfulness of nåma and rúpa accompanies kusala citta and that 
kusala citta does not arise as often as akusala citta. There are 
countless more moments of akusala citta than kusala citta. If we 
remember this we will be less inclined to false expectations. When we 
have understood that there should be study of the characteristics of 
nåma and rúpa in order to have more understanding of them, we will 
stop wondering what mindfulness is or doubting about it.
There is usually forgetfulness of nåma and rúpa, but sometimes there 
can be kusala citta accompanied by mindfulness of the reality which 
appears at the present moment, a nåma or a rúpa. We cannot do anything 
special to cause the arising of sati because sati is anattå. It arises 
because of its appropriate conditions. The right conditions for sati 
are: listening to the Dhamma, theoretical understanding of nåma and 
rúpa and deeply considering the Dhamma in our life. One may be 
discouraged about it that, although one has listened for many years, 
there is hardly any awareness in daily life. When one merely listens 
but does not deeply consider what one heard and does not test the 
meaning of it, there are no conditions for awareness. Through 
considering the Dhamma one builds up one's own understanding, one is 
not dependent on other people. Everybody should consider nåma and rúpa 
in his own situation.
You asked in your letter what the difference is between sati and 
thinking. There can be thinking with kusala citta and with akusala 
citta. Most of the time there is thinking with clinging or with 
aversion. When there is thinking in the right way about nåma and rúpa 
it can condition right awareness later on, but we do not know when. 
When we think about sati we will not know its characteristic, but when 
right mindfulness of nåma and rúpa arises we will know what sati is. 
We can notice that there are countless moments of thinking in a day, 
and when there is thinking it is time to study the characteristic of 
thinking. Then we can come to know it as a nåma which arises because 
of its own conditions, not self. It is the thinking which thinks.
"Sometimes sati seems to be contemporaneous with its object, sometimes 
later", you write. We should be careful and not mistake thinking for 
sati. When there is study with awareness of one reality at a time, the 
reality which appears, one does not think about sati as being 
contemporaneous with its object or not. There is at that moment only 
the characteristic of the nåma or rúpa which appears.
You want to know when in the process of cittas sati arises. Sati has 
to accompany kusala citta, but it can be mindful also of akusala 
citta. When for example aversion, dosa, arises, it can be object of 
mindfulness. Cittas succeed one another very rapidly and after the 
dosa has fallen away there can be in another process kusala cittas 
with sati. Sati can then be mindful of the dosa which has fallen away. 
If there is unpleasant feeling now can there not be study of its 
characteristic, in order to know it as not self, not my unpleasant 
feeling? We are inclined to take feeling for self, but when we 
understand that feelings arise because of conditions we will be less 
inclined to take them for mine or self. Sometimes I take things to 
heart and I have unpleasant feeling, sometimes not. This is because of 
different conditions. We should learn that there is no self who can 
control feelings. We do not have to think of processes when there is 
the study of different characteristics. All that matters is to know 
the world in the ariyan sense. This world is a new world to us since 
we used to know only the world of conventional truth, the world of 
self, people and possessions.
When there is no development of understanding of nåma and rúpa, 
akusala cittas will arise very often: we are infatuated with the 
objects we experience, we have aversion towards them or there is 
ignorance about realities. When we, for example, see a teapot, we may 
be ignorant of the six worlds in the ariyan sense. When we are 
confused as to the different doorways, we think that what presents 
itself through the eye-door is a teapot and we take it for something 
which stays. However, through the eye-door it is only visible object 
that presents itself, just for a moment. When we touch the teapot, the 
rúpas which are hardness, softness, heat or cold may present 
themselves. In order to know realities as they are we should be aware 
of them as they present themselves through the different doorways, one 
at a time. Like and dislike are again different phenomena and we 
should not confuse them with seeing or visible object. Thinking of the 
concept "teapot" is again another reality, a type of nåma.
Whatever nåma or rúpa appears can be object of mindfulness and thus 
right understanding can develop. If there is preference for particular 
types of nåma or rúpa which seem to be so clear, there is clinging. We 
should learn different characteristics of nåma and rúpa as we go along 
in daily life; when walking, standing, getting up, taking a bath, 
eating, listening or talking. Only thus will there be the 
disintegration of the "self ". We will know the world in the ariyan 
sense. We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saîåyatana-vagga, Kindred 
Sayings on Sense, Third Fifty, Chapter IV, § 136) that the Buddha said 
to the monks:

Devas and mankind, monks, delight in objects, they are excited by 
objects. It is owing to the instability, the coming to an end, the 
ceasing of objects, monks, that devas and mankind live woefully. They 
delight in sounds, scents, savours, in touch, they delight in 
mind-states, and are excited by them. It is owing to the instability, 
the coming to an end, the ceasing of mind-states, monks, that devas 
and mankind live woefully.
But the Tathågata, monks, who is arahat, a Fully-enlightened One, 
seeing, as they really are, both the arising and the destruction, the 
satisfaction, the misery and the way of escape from objects,-he 
delights not in objects, takes not pleasure in them, is not excited by 
them. It is owing to the instability, the coming to an end, the 
ceasing of objects that the Tathågata dwells at ease.

Is this real life or not? When we do not see things as they are we are 
enslaved. How did the Buddha become free? By fully knowing realities, 
by knowing their characteristics as they appear through the six doors.


With mettå


Nina van Gorkom

						Tokyo
15 February 							
1971		 Dear Mr. G.,

First I will quote your question about personality-belief: "I wish you 
could tell me more about personality-belief, sakkåya-diììhi. Is 
sakkåya-diììhi wrong view? But, if I have wrong view, it is only a 
kind of nåma, to be recognized as such."
Sakkåya is a name for the five khandhas which are objects of clinging. 
Sakkåya-diììhi¤¤ is wrong view about the five khandhas. We have 
accumulated wrong view about them during many lives. There is wrong 
view about the khandhas when we really believe that they are permanent 
and self.
All conditioned realities in ourselves and around ourselves can be 
classified as five khandhas and these are the following:

	rúpa-kkhandha 		¤	physical phenomena
	vedanå-kkhandha 		¤	feelings
	saññå-kkhandha 		¤	remembrance
	saòkhåra-kkhandha	¤	cetasikas (mental factors)						
except feeling and saññå
	viññåùa-kkhandha		¤	all cittas

This classification may seem rather theoretical, but it is a 
classification of realities which arise now. There are the five 
khandhas now while you are seeing. There is the eyesense which is 
rúpa-kkhandha, there is visible object which is also rúpa-kkhandha, 
there is seeing which is viññåùa-kkhandha. Seeing is accompanied by 
feeling, vedanå-kkhandha, by remembrance, saññå-kkhandha, and by other 
cetasikas which are saòkhåra-kkhandha. The khandhas arise and fall 
away, they do not stay and none of the khandhas is self. Do you have 
an idea of a self who is seeing? It is only viññåùa-kkhandha which 
arises for an extremely short moment, performs the function of seeing 
and then falls away. Seeing arises because of its own conditions. 
Eyesense and visible object are conditions for seeing. Without these 
conditions you could not see. Can you create your own eye-sense? It 
arises because of its appropriate conditions. Seeing, eyesense and 
visible object do not belong to you. Do you think that you see people? 
It is only visible object, rúpa-kkhandha, which is seen just for a 
moment and then falls away.
When we have listened to the Dhamma we understand in theory that there 
is no self, no being, but our understanding is still weak. We do not 
directly experience the truth of realities as they appear one at a 
time. We cling to the khandhas and have an idea that they can last. Do 
we have a notion of a "whole" of mind and body, of "my personality"? 
What we take for a whole of mind and body are only five khandhas which 
arise and fall away. We also cling to rúpas outside ourselves and 
consider them as things which last. Don't we cling to our possessions, 
to our house and all the things in it? We may be stingy, we may not be 
inclined to give things away. We should remember that what we take for 
our possessions are only rúpa-kkhandha which arises and falls away.
There is not necessarily wrong view every time we cling to the 
khandhas. We may just be attached to our body without there being 
wrong view about it. We can cling to the khandhas with conceit. When 
we have conceit and compare our body or our mental qualities with 
those of someone else there cannot be wrong view at the same time. 
Conceit and wrong view cannot arise together. We learn from the 
Abhidhamma that there are eight different types of lobha-múla-cittas, 
cittas which are rooted in attachment, of which four are accompanied 
by wrong view, diììhi, and four unaccompanied by wrong view. When one 
has studied the Dhamma and acquired intellectual understanding about 
the nature of not self of realities it does not mean that one has 
realized the truth of not self. We have accumulated so much ignorance 
about realities and the latent tendency of wrong view has not been 
eradicated. Only the sotåpanna who has developed understanding to the 
degree that enlightenment could be realized has eradicated the latent 
tendency to wrong view. Paññå, right understanding, must be developed 
in order to realize nåma and rúpa as impermanent and not self.
You wrote to me that when you have wrong view it can be recognized as 
such. It is not easy to know exactly when there is clinging with wrong 
view and when without wrong view. Only when paññå is keener it can 
know the different characteristics of realities more clearly.
We are so used to thinking that we see people, houses and trees. Do we 
really study with awareness seeing which appears now or visible object 
which appears now? Do we study again and again the realities which 
appear one at a time? Only in that way can we find out that no person 
can appear through the eyes but only visible object, that which is 
visible. We prefer to think about people and things, we prefer to live 
in the world of our thoughts instead of studying realities such as 
seeing or visible object. We have accumulated the tendency to be 
absorbed in our thoughts about people and things, and thus it is 
natural that we are inclined to thinking about those things which are 
not real, which are only concepts or ideas. It is not self who thinks, 
but a type of nåma which arises because of its own conditions. We 
should not try to push away our thinking but we can begin to notice 
the difference between the moments we are absorbed in our thoughts and 
the moments of being aware of one reality at a time, such as visible 
object or seeing. In this way we can learn the difference between 
concepts or ideas and realities. Only when we know the difference we 
can gradually learn how to study realities with awareness and in this 
way there can be more understanding of them.
You have asked me what it means to take something for "self", for 
"attå ".
Attå or self implies something which stays. Where is the self, does it 
have a characteristic which can be directly experienced? Is the body 
the self? The body consists of rúpas which arise and then fall away 
immediately. Is feeling self? Feelings change all the time, they can 
be happy, unhappy or indifferent. Is thinking self? Thinking changes 
all the time, thus, how could you identify yourself with thinking? 
When we learn to be aware of the phenomena which appear through the 
six doors we will lose interest in things which cannot be directly 
experienced but which are only objects of speculation.
Even though we may not expressively think, "It is I" , we are likely 
to be confused about realities. So long as right understanding has not 
been developed we join different realities together into a "mass", a 
"whole". For example, we do not distinguish the characteristic of 
sound from the characteristic of hearing, and thus our knowledge of 
them is still vague. We do not distinguish hearing from thinking about 
what we heard, or from like and dislike. When understanding has not 
been developed yet we are also confused as to the different doorways 
through which objects are experienced. For example, hearing 
experiences sound through the ear-door and thinking about what was 
heard experiences its object through the mind-door. 
You asked me what the difference is between seeing a rose and seeing 
its colour. 
There is seeing time and again but there is no right understanding of 
it. We do not realize the characteristics of phenomena as they appear 
one at a time through the different doorways. The nåma which sees only 
experiences visible object or colour through the eye-door. When we 
recognize an object such as a rose there is not seeing. The object is 
not colour but a concept or idea we form up by thinking. The thinking 
of the concept "rose" is conditioned by seeing but seeing and thinking 
arise at different moments. There is the experience of colour and 
there is thinking of the concept rose, and then colour impinges again 
on the eye-door and there is seeing again. How fast cittas change, how 
fast objects change! In which world do we mostly live? Do we know the 
six worlds appearing through the six doors or do we live only in the 
world of conventional truth? Is it wisdom to know only one world? 
Should we not know the worlds appearing through the six doors by being 
aware of different characteristics? In that way the self can gradually 
be broken up into elements until there is nothing left of it. 
We will keep on clinging to the "whole" of the five khandhas, to body 
and mental phenomena so long as we have not realized that they are 
only elements which do not stay. We read in the Kindred Sayings (III, 
Khandhå-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Elements, Middle Fifty, Chapter 5, § 
102, Impermanence) that the Buddha said to the monks at Såvatthí:

The perceiving of impermanence, monks, if practised and enlarged, 
wears out all sensual lust, all lust of rebirth, all ignorance, it 
wears out, tears out all conceit of "I am".
Just as, monks, in the autumn season a ploughman with a great 
ploughshare, cuts through the spreading roots as he ploughs; even so, 
monks, the perceiving of impermanence, if practised and enlarged, 
wears out all sensual lust, wears out all lust for body, all lust for 
rebirth, wears out all ignorance, wears out, tears out all conceit of 
"I am".

The Buddha uses several similes in order to explain that the 
perception of impermanence wears out all clinging, ignorance and 
conceit. Further on we read:

Just as, monks, in the autumn season, when the sky is opened up and 
cleared of clouds, the sun, leaping up into the firmament, drives away 
all darkness from the heavens, and shines and burns and flashes forth; 
even so, monks, the perceiving of impermanence, if practised and 
enlarged, wears out all sensual lust, wears out all lust for body, all 
desire for rebirth, all ignorance, wears out, tears out all conceit of 
"I am".
And in what way, monks, does it so wear them out?
It is by seeing: "Such is body; such is the arising of body; such is 
the ceasing of body. Such is feeling, remembrance, the activities 
(saòkhåra-kkhandha), such is consciousness, its arising and its 
ceasing."
Even thus practised and enlarged, monks, does the perceiving of 
impermanence wear out all sensual lust, all lust for body, all desire 
for rebirth, all ignorance, wears out, tears out all conceit of "I am".

When one begins to develop right understanding of nåma and rúpa there 
cannot yet be the direct realization of their arising and falling 
away. First their different characteristics have to be clearly known, 
nåma has to be known as nåma, different from rúpa, and rúpa has to be 
known as rúpa, different from nåma. Understanding develops stage by 
stage and it is at a later stage that the arising and falling away of 
the reality which appears can be directly known. However, even the 
sotåpanna who has realized nåma and rúpa as they are, as not self, has 
not eradicated all clinging and ignorance. Only the arahat has 
eradicated all kinds of clinging, all ignorance and conceit. When we 
read this sutta we can be reminded to begin to study with awareness 
the nåma and rúpa which appear now. Since it is a long way to realize 
their impermanence we should not delay the development of 
understanding of them. 
You were wondering how there can be different characters of people, a 
"personality", if there is no self. There are accumulations, 
tendencies which are accumulated in the citta. Cittas arise and fall 
away but the citta which falls away conditions the next citta and that 
is why accumulations can be "carried on" from one citta to the next 
one. That is why we can notice that people have different 
inclinations, that they behave in different ways. Our behaviour is 
conditioned, it is not self. We cling to our personality, to the image 
we have of ourselves. We want to be good, we cling to our good deeds. 
We have not realized that there is no self, no matter kusala citta or 
akusala citta arises. We do not possess kusala, it cannot stay. It 
only arises for a moment and then akusala citta is bound to arise. 
Because of our ignorance we do not even notice when there is kusala 
citta and when akusala citta. For example, when we give something away 
with generosity there are kusala cittas which can be accompanied by 
pleasant feeling. Very shortly afterwards akusala cittas with 
attachment may arise and these can also be accompanied by pleasant 
feeling. We may, for instance, think," I did this very well; I have 
really achieved something; I did this." If there is no awareness we do 
not know the different moments of citta and the different moments of 
feeling. It seems that there is only one kind of feeling, pleasant 
feeling, which lasts, and it seems that it is kusala all the time. 
Thus we take for wholesome what is unwholesome. It is essential to 
have right understanding of kusala and akusala, otherwise kusala 
cannot be developed. 
You wrote that you can be aware of more than one reality at a time. 
This is not possible. Each citta can have only one object at a time 
and thus also the citta with awareness can have only one object at a 
time. One may take for awareness what is only thinking. For example, 
one may have an idea of oneself seeing and hearing at the same time. 
Then there is thinking of a concept, of a "whole" of different 
phenomena which are joined together. If there can be awareness of 
different characteristics of realities which present themselves one at 
a time one will find out that awareness can be aware of only one 
object at a time. It is unpredictable which reality will present 
itself at which moment. It can be softness or hardness which impinges 
on the bodysense, it can be sound, visible object or another reality. 
So long as we do not distinguish between different realities which 
arise closely one after the other we will keep on thinking that 
realities last. For example, cittas with attachment may arise and then 
there may be thinking of the attachment. We may think with aversion 
about the attachment which arose a moment ago. If there can be 
awareness of different characteristics it can be known that attachment 
is one kind of reality and thinking with aversion another kind of 
reality. They arise because of their own conditions, they are beyond 
control, not self.
You asked me whether awareness of sound means recognizing sound as 
sound.
Who is recognizing sound as sound? Is there an idea of self who 
recognizes sound as sound? When two people say that they recognize 
sound as sound one person may have right understanding and the other 
person may not. We may understand in theory that sati is not self but 
we may still cling to an idea of "my sati". When one has desire for 
sati and one wants to create conditions for its arising one has not 
understood that sati is not self, that it arises because of its own 
conditions. One may imagine what sati should be like but instead of 
speculation about it one should keep in mind that the realities which 
appear and thus also sati and paññå are only conditioned phenomena 
which are beyond control. Beyond control means that they are not self. 
Our goal should not be to have many moments of sati but to develop 
right understanding of the nåma and rúpa which appear now. Sound 
appears time and again. Right understanding of sound can be developed 
when it appears and we do not need to think about sati. One may say 
that one recognizes sound as sound but one may not realize it as a 
kind of rúpa which appears through the earsense. One may name it 
"rúpa," but naming a reality is not the same as directly knowing its 
characteristic when it appears. In the beginning there cannot be a 
precise knowledge of nåma and rúpa but we should remember that it can 
be developed only when there is study with awareness of the nåma or 
rúpa presenting itself now.
You said that you can experience "something" of impermanence, 
"fluctuations" of phenomena. Then there is only thinking about an idea 
one has of impermanence. The arising and falling away of one nåma or 
rúpa at a time can, as I said, only be realized later on. It cannot be 
realized so long as one is still confused about the difference between 
nåma and rúpa.
We live most of the time in the world of conventional truth, and there 
is much ignorance about the world of absolute truth, the world of 
paramattha dhammas. In your letter you give an example of young people 
who are displeased with situations in their countries and who commit 
acts of violence (dosa) in order to show that they are discontented. 
Their accumulated violence is the real cause that they commit these 
acts, and the situations they are displeased with are only 
opportunities for their accumulated dosa to appear. Dosa will always 
arise so long as it has not been eradicated.
In our daily life there are many moments of aversion, dosa. We may 
wake up with a slightly unpleasant feeling. At first we do not realize 
that there is dosa, but then we may remember an unpleasant event, for 
example, unkind words someone may have spoken to us the day before. Or 
we may worry about a difficult situation we will have to face that 
day. These circumstances are not the real cause of our dosa. The 
outward circumstances, the people we meet change, but there is still 
our accumulated dosa and it will come out, always finding an object. 
There will always be reasons for dosa so long as it has not been 
eradicated yet. The person who has attained the third stage of 
enlightenment, the anågåmí, has eradicated dosa. The way leading to 
the eradication of defilements is the development of right 
understanding of them when they appear. There is no other way.
How can we realize that dosa is a conditioned nåma? Not by thinking 
about the dosa which has fallen away already, or about the events 
which conditioned its arising, but by being aware of it when it 
appears at the present moment. Only if there is mindfulness of 
phenomena as they appear through the six doors will we gradually 
realize that they are conditioned realities, not self. If there is 
awareness only of phenomena appearing through the eye-door or through 
the ear-door, it is not enough. There is not only visible object or 
sound, but also seeing, hearing, attachment, lobha, aversion, dosa, 
and other realities. 
There can also be awareness of the different kinds of feelings which 
arise. Our feelings change all the time. There are feelings arising on 
account of what is seen, heard, smelt, tasted, of what is experienced 
through the body-sense and of what is thought. At each moment of citta 
the condition for the accompanying feeling changes and thus feelings 
change all the time. It does not appear to us this way when we cling 
to the feeling which has fallen away already. It exists no more but we 
keep on pondering over it. If we cling to feelings of the past, we 
live more in the world of illusions than in the world of realities, of 
paramattha dhammas.
In the Visuddhimagga (XX, 96) nåma and rúpa which arise and fall away 
are compared to the sound of a lute which arises because of conditions 
and falls away again. The text states: 

`...But just as there is no store, prior to its arising, of the sound 
that arises when a lute is played, nor does it come from any store 
when it arises, nor does it go in any direction when it ceases, nor 
does it persist as a store when it has ceased, but on the contrary, 
not having been, it is brought into being owing to the lute, the 
lute's neck, and the man's appropriate effort, and having been, it 
vanishes-so too all material and immaterial states, not having been, 
are brought into being, having been they vanish.'

It is beneficial to be reminded that the nåmas and rúpas which appear 
in our daily life arise because of conditions and then fall away. If 
we consider this thoroughly there will be less inclination to keep on 
thinking about what is past already. In this way there will be less 
forgetfulness of what appears now. You don't have to do anything 
special to be aware, there are objects impinging on the six doors time 
and again. When you touch water which is too hot heat presents itself. 
You may think, "This water is too hot", and then there is thinking. 
Hot water is a concept we think of, but heat is a reality, a rúpa, 
which impinges on the bodysense, it can be directly experienced. The 
rúpa which is heat, the nåma which experiences heat or the painful 
feeling can appear again and again, in between the thinking. These are 
all different phenomena which do not stay, which are not self. There 
is no person who has painful feeling, there is a nåma which feels. 
Painful feeling arises because of its own conditions. When there are 
not the right conditions for it it cannot arise.
When we hear harsh words there are conditions for unpleasant feeling, 
but there can also be moments of awareness in between. Besides 
unpleasant feeling there are sound, hearing and other realities 
appearing. In this way we can realize that unpleasant feeling is only 
one phenomenon among many other realities which each arise because of 
their own conditions. Whereas if we are not mindful we think that 
there is only "my unpleasant feeling" which seems to last. We may 
believe that this particular person, this place and this situation are 
the causes of our unhappiness. However, these are not the real causes. 
The real cause is our accumulated dosa.
When we are aware of nåma and rúpa there is less enslavement to the 
objects we experience. When there is awareness of visible object which 
appears through the eyes there is no enslavement to visible object. 
When there is awareness of sound which appears through the ears there 
is no enslavement to sound, and it is the same with regard to the 
objects which present themselves through the other doorways. Wisdom 
can make us free, but we should not expect results within a short 
time. Do you remember the sutta about the handle of the knife which 
wears out very slowly, in the Kindred Sayings (III, Khandhå-vagga, 
Middle Fifty, Adze-handle)? The Buddha speaks about the handle of a 
knife which one holds each day. It gradually wears away, but one 
cannot notice how much is worn out each day. We cannot control the 
frequency of awareness, since it is anattå, not self, arising because 
of its own conditions. However, even a few moments of awareness in 
between lobha, dosa and moha is very beneficial. One begins to develop 
the Path which will surely lead to freedom. We read about the 
condition for freedom from defilements in the Kindred Sayings (IV, 
Saîåyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, Third Fifty, Chapter III; 
§ 124). We read about a conversation the housefather Ugga had with the 
Buddha:

`Pray, lord, what is the condition, what is the cause whereby in this 
world some beings are not wholly set free in this very life, while 
other beings are wholly set free?'
`There are, housefather, objects cognizable by the eye. sounds 
cognizable by the ear¤scents¤savours¤tangibles cognizable by the 
body...mind-states cognizable by the mind¤If he has grasping for them, 
housefather, a monk is not wholly set free. That, housefather, is the 
condition, that is the cause whereby in this world some beings are not 
wholly set free in this very life.
Likewise, housefather, there are objects cognizable by the eye¤If he 
has no grasping for them a monk is wholly set free. That, housefather, 
is the condition, that is the cause whereby in this very life some 
beings are not wholly set free, while other beings are wholly set 
free.'

When there is seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching or 
thinking, are we free? Don't you find that at the moment of 
mindfulness of one object at a time there is a beginning of freedom? 
There is less enslavement to objects and one is on the way leading to 
the eradication of the wrong view of self, of "personality belief". 
There is no other way but the development of understanding of the 
realities which present themselves through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 
bodysense and mind-door.



With mettå,



Nina van Gorkom
						Tokyo
						1 March							
1971 		Dear Mr. G.,

"What is sati-sampajañña, clear comprehension? I am puzzled by this 
term." This was a question you asked me.
There are many degrees of comprehension. What would "clear 
comprehension" mean, theoretical knowledge or the knowledge through 
one's own experience? Which would be clearer? Does the sotåpanna have 
clear comprehension of nåmas and rúpas, of the world in the ariyan 
sense? Is the degree of clear comprehension of the arahat still 
higher? What is the way to develop clear comprehension, is it through 
thinking about realities or through awareness of them when they 
present themselves? Would awareness of realities not be the way that 
comprehension becomes clearer in different stages?
The term sati-sampajañña is composed of the word sati, mindfulness or 
awareness, and the word sampajañña which means discrimination or 
comprehension. The commentary to the Dialogues of the Buddha (Dígha 
Nikåya), the Sumaògalavilåsiní, explains that there is a fourfold 
sampajañña. These aspects make it clear that there are different 
levels of sati-sampajañña. They are the following kinds of 
sati-sampajañña:

1. såtthaka-sampajañña	¤	comprehension with 						
regard to the purpose
2. sappåya-sampajañña 	¤	comprehension of what is 					
suitable, fitting
3. gocara-sampajañña 	¤	comprehension of the 						
object
4. asammoha-sampajañña 	¤	comprehension of non-						
delusion

Såtthaka-sampajañña, comprehension with regard to the purpose, 
pertains to our bodily health as well as to the growth of kusala and 
understanding. The Buddha was considerate of the monk's bodily and 
mental welfare. The monk was taught to have comprehension of the 
purpose with regard to the taking of almsfood and the use of the other 
requisites. There are rules for the monks with regard to the use of 
them. He should not use them with attachment. We read in the 
Visuddhimagga (I, 85) about the way he should use almsfood:

`Reflecting wisely, he uses almsfood neither for amusement nor for 
intoxication nor for smartening nor for embellishment, but only for 
the endurance and continuance of this body, for the ending of 
discomfort, and for assisting the life of purity: "Thus I shall put a 
stop to old feelings and shall not arouse new feelings, and I shall be 
healthy and blameless and live in comfort." '

The monk will use almsfood just as a sick man uses medicine. He will 
put a stop to the feeling of hunger and he will not indulge in 
immoderate eating.
The Buddha, on the day of his enlightenment, stopped fasting and he 
took the rice-gruel which was offered to him by Sujåtå. He had 
understood that the undertaking of severe ascetical practices was not 
the Middle Way.
Also laypeople can apply to a certain extent, in their own situation, 
some of the rules of training for the monks. When there is 
sati-sampajañña while we are eating, it knows the right purpose of the 
taking of food. We do not have to think all the time what the purpose 
is of what we are doing. When sati-sampajañña arises it knows the 
right purpose. When there is clear comprehension with regard to the 
purpose of the taking of food, there are conditions not to indulge in 
food, but to take it as a medicine for the body. One can find out what 
is right for one's health. One should not torture oneself by staying 
too long in one position of the body. Some people have desire for 
tranquillity and they are hoping to be able to develop it to a high 
degree by sitting for a long time. When there is clear comprehension 
with regard to the purpose one will not torture oneself, one will 
stretch at the right time or change one's posture. 
Sati-sampajañña with regard to the purpose is necessary for the 
development of kusala and right understanding. When we visit the good 
friend in Dhamma who explains the Dhamma in the right way, or when we 
visit the holy places in India it can be done with sati-sampajañña 
with regard to the purpose, namely the development of right 
understanding. 
We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Tens, Chapter XVIII, § 4) 
about aim and not-aim. The Buddha said to the monks:

`And what, monks, is not aim?
Taking life, taking what is not given, wrong conduct in sexual 
desires, falsehood, slander, bitter speech, idle babble, coveting, 
harmfulness and wrong view. This, monks, is called not-aim.' 

We then read that the abstaining from akusala kamma is aim. 
Sati-sampajañña with regard to the purpose sees the benefit of kusala 
and the disadvantage of akusala. When other people speak in a harsh 
way to us we think immediately of ourselves, of our own interest. What 
is really useful to ourselves? When sati-sampajañña arises it sees the 
benefit of patience and lovingkindness, it sees the benefit of all 
kinds of kusala. When other people are unkind they give us an 
opportunity to cultivate patience and endurance. We need 
sati-sampajañña with regard to the purpose in daily life. If one wants 
to develop calm (samatha) one needs sati-sampajañña which knows the 
benefit of kusala and which sees the disadvantage of attachment to the 
sense objects. When one has desire for tranquillity the citta is 
akusala, but one may not notice it. In order to develop calm which is 
wholesome there must be sati-sampajañña which realizes the 
disadvantage of desire. So long as there is desire one will not reach 
the goal. 
For the development of the Eightfold Path sati-sampajañña with regard 
to the aim is necessary. We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the 
Tens, Chapter XIV, § 4) that the Buddha said to the monks that the 
factors of the wrong path are not-aim. As regards aim, we read:

`And what, monks, is aim?
Right view, right thinking, right speech, right action, right effort, 
right mindfulness, right concentration, right knowledge and right 
release....' 

When one follows the wrong path there is no sati-sampajañña. When one 
develops the right path there is clear comprehension with regard to 
the aim. The goal is the eradication of wrong view and all the other 
defilements. If one develops the right path one will eventually reach 
the goal.
We believe that right understanding of nåma and rúpa is what we value 
most highly in life, but is this true? We should be sincere and get to 
know our own accumulations. Don't we find our work and our relaxation 
more important than the development of right understanding? If there 
is sati-sampajañña which sees the value of awareness of realities 
right understanding can develop during the time we are working and 
also during the time of relaxation. There are nåma and rúpa all the 
time, no-matter where we are. There can be a beginning of the study of 
them when they appear. We do not have to go to a quiet place and 
change our usual way of life in order to develop understanding. When 
there is desire for awareness it will hinder the development of 
understanding of our life, of our accumulations. We have accumulated 
attachment to pleasant things, we like to go to concerts or watch T.V. 
We should learn to see that in such situations there are only dhammas, 
realities, which arise because of their own conditions. If we do not 
get to know lobha as it is, as only a conditioned reality, 
enlightenment cannot be attained and defilements cannot be eradicated.
The second sampajañña, sappåya-sampajañña, is knowing what is 
suitable, fitting to oneself. This sampajañña appertains to our bodily 
health as well as to the development of kusala. We know that we should 
not neglect our bodily health and therefore we should know what is 
suitable for us in order to avoid sickness and to live in comfort. We 
should find out, for example, what is the right kind of food for us 
and what not. What is suitable for one person may not be suitable for 
another person. We need sappåya-sampajañña in order to know the right 
conditions for our bodily health. We also need sappåya-sampajañña in 
order to know the right conditions for the development of kusala. 
Those who have accumulations to develop samatha should know the 
particular conditions which have to be fulfilled in order to develop 
calm. Most important is right understanding which knows precisely when 
the citta is kusala and when akusala, otherwise calm cannot be 
developed. Sappåya-sampajañña is needed in order to know which of the 
meditation subjects is suitable to oneself so that calm can grow. The 
meditation on corpses, for example, is not suitable for everybody, for 
some people this subject conditions aversion or fear. If one has 
accumulations to develop calm to the degree of jhåna one has to live 
in a secluded place. One needs sappåya-sampajañña in order to find out 
which place is suitable to oneself.
For the development of vipassanå the conditions are different from the 
conditions for the development of calm. The conditions for the 
development of vipassanå are: association with the right friend who 
can explain the Dhamma, listening, considering and testing the meaning 
of what one has heard. In this way there can be the correct 
understanding of the Eightfold Path. If there is sappåya-sampajañña 
which knows what is suitable for the development of right 
understanding it will develop.
We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Kindred Sayings on Sense, 
Saîåyatana-vagga, Third Fifty, Chapter V, § 146, Helpful) about the 
"sappåya" which leads to that which should be valued most highly: the 
eradication of defilements. This "sappåya", this helpful condition, is 
the perception of impermanence. We read that the Buddha said to the 
monks:

`I will teach you, monks, a way that is helpful for Nibbåna.
Do you listen to it. And what, monks, is that way?
Herein, monks, a monk regards the eye as impermanent. He regards 
visible object, eye-consciousness, eye-contact, as impermanent. That 
pleasant or unpleasant or indifferent feeling which arises by 
eye-contact-that also he regards as impermanent.
He regards the ear¤the nose¤the tongue, savours, tongue-consciousness, 
tongue-contact as impermanent. That pleasant or unpleasant or 
indifferent feeling, which arises by tongue-contact-that also he 
regards as impermanent.
He regards the body...he regards the mind, mind-states, 
mind-consciousness, mind-contact as impermanent. The pleasant or 
unpleasant or indifferent feeling¤arising therefrom-he regards that 
also as impermanent.
This, monks, is the way that is helpful for Nibbåna.' 

The impermanence of the realities which appear through the six doors 
cannot be realized immediately. First the rúpa which appears has to be 
realized as rúpa and the nåma which appears has to be realized as 
nåma. Their arising and falling away cannot be realized if one cannot 
clearly discern their different characteristics. This sutta reminds us 
to at least begin with awareness of realities such as visible object, 
seeing, feeling or attachment, of the realities which appear now. That 
is the condition which is helpful to gain more understanding. 
The third sampajañña is gocara-sampajañña. Gocara literally means 
place or domain. In this case it is not the place where one should 
stay but "where citta goes", the object, årammaùa, of the citta. When 
gocara-sampajañña arises there is comprehension of the object of 
mindfulness. All realities which appear now through the six doors are 
the gocara or "domain" of sati of the Eightfold Path. All of the nåmas 
and the rúpas are included in the four "satipaììhånas", the 
applications of mindfulness. They are: mindfulness of the body, of 
feeling, of citta and of dhammas. The object of sati is a paramattha 
dhamma which appears now, it is not a concept such as a body, a hand 
or a chair. Some people think that the postures of the body can be 
object of mindfulness. They think for example that the "sitting rúpa" 
should be object of mindfulness. Among the twenty-eight kinds of rúpa 
which are taught in the Abhidhamma there is no sitting rúpa. The body 
is composed of the four Great Elements and other rúpas which each have 
their own specific characteristic. The characteristic of hardness or 
heat may appear, no matter whether one is sitting, standing, walking 
or laying down. Sitting has no characteristic, it is a concept one has 
of the whole body which sits. In order to eradicate the idea of self 
who is sitting there should be awareness of one reality at a time, one 
nåma or rúpa. We have conditions to think of sitting and we do not 
have to avoid that, but we should know the difference between the 
moments we think of concepts such as the whole body and the moments 
there is awareness of a paramattha dhamma (absolute reality). 
Is there any object of awareness we do not like and of which we think 
that it ought not to be object of awareness? Do we "push it aside" and 
wait until there is another object? For instance, most of us do not 
like it to be in a hurry. Would we rather not be aware of nåma and 
rúpa at such moments? Or do we think that we can't? Is there not a 
secret tendency not to know objects we dislike? In that way right 
understanding of realities cannot develop. When we are feeling tired, 
or angry, or when we are discouraged about the development of 
satipaììhåna, can there be awareness even of such moments? They are 
only realities arising because of conditions, not self. We understand 
in theory that everything can be object of awareness, but do we apply 
this understanding? Wrong practice (sílabbata-paråmåså, translated as 
clinging to rules and ritual) is a kind of wrong view (diììhi). So 
long as we are not sotåpanna wrong view has not been eradicated and 
thus wrong practice can arise. We may think that when we are in the 
company of many people it is impossible to be aware. Do we try to 
ignore particular realities we do not think fit to be objects of 
awareness? We can find out that although we have intellectual 
understanding about wrong practice such tendencies can still arise. It 
is essential to be aware also of these moments. If they are not known 
wrong view cannot be eradicated. 
If one knows that whatever reality appears now can be object of 
awareness right understanding can develop. Should we not know seeing, 
hearing or thinking which appear now? When there are conditions 
awareness can arise in any situation, also when we are laughing or 
talking. We read for example in the "Khemaka Sutta" Kindred Sayings 
(III, Khandhå-vagga, Middle Fifty, Chapter IV, § 89) that the monk 
Khemaka attained arahatship while he explained Dhamma to others, and 
that sixty monks who listened attained arahatship as well. We read in 
the "Satipaììhåna Sutta" Middle Length Sayings (I, no.10) that the 
Buddha, while he was staying among the Kuru people in Kammåssadhamma, 
spoke to the monks about the "Four Applications of Mindfulness". We 
read in the section on Mindfulness of the Body, on the Four Kinds of 
Clear Comprehension, that the Buddha said:

`...And again, monks, a monk, when he is setting out or returning is 
one acting in a clearly conscious way; when he is looking in front or 
looking around...when he has bent in or stretched out (his arm)...when 
he is carrying his outer cloak, bowl and robe...when he is eating, 
drinking, chewing, tasting...when he is obeying the calls of 
nature...when he is walking, standing, sitting, asleep, awake, 
talking, silent, he is acting in a clearly conscious way...' 

A clearly conscious way is the translation of sati-sampajañña. Is 
there clear comprehension with regard to the object of right 
understanding while we are looking in front or looking around? Is 
there clear comprehension while we are bending or stretching, eating, 
drinking, walking, standing, sitting, lying down, while we are talking 
or keeping silent? We may have read this text many times, but do we 
really apply what the Buddha taught? We need to consider this text 
often, even if we think that we have understood it already. We can 
find out that considering the teachings is suitable, helpful, that it 
is a "sappåya" for the development of understanding. This sutta can 
remind us that there is no limitation to the "field of awareness". 
When we are, for example, looking for something in our handbag, or 
when the shoelace breaks while tying it up, there are only nåma and 
rúpa, but we are likely to be forgetful. Usually dosa (aversion) 
arises at such moments. However, sometimes there can be awareness and 
then different characteristics of realities can be known. Dosa has a 
characteristic which is different from hardness or motion which 
appears through touch. Even if there is only a short moment of 
awareness of a reality it is helpful because it is a condition that 
awareness can be accumulated. In that way the tendency to take 
realities for self will become less.
If gocara-sampajañña is well established, there can be the fourth 
sampajañña, asammoha-sampajañña. Asammoha means "non-delusion". When 
there is asammoha-sampajañña there is non-delusion about the object of 
awareness. One no longer doubts whether there can be awareness while 
one is busy or while one is in trying circumstances. When there is no 
delusion the realities appearing through the six doors can be known as 
they are, as not self. When there is awareness of visible object there 
is no delusion about visible object, it is realized as just a reality, 
not a person or a thing.
It is useful to know the different aspects of clear comprehension, 
sati-sampajañña: clear comprehension with regard to the purpose, with 
regard to what is suitable, with regard to the object of sati and 
clear comprehension of non-delusion. However, while right 
understanding is being developed we do not have to try to pinpoint 
which kind of sampajañña arises. It is sati-sampajañña, not self, 
which knows the purpose of the development of the Eightfold Path, the 
eradication of defilements. It is sati-sampajañña which knows the 
right conditions which are suitable for the development of right 
understanding. In the beginning one still doubts whether there can be 
awareness in any situation, one limits the field of sati, and thus 
there cannot yet be non-delusion about the object of awareness.
You think that there are particular factors which can hinder 
awareness, such as our working situation or the company of other 
people. The place where we are, the people we meet, noise, travelling, 
sickness, all these factors are not impediments for satipaììhåna. 
Wrong understanding of the path is a hindrance.
In the Visuddhimagga (III, 29) we read about the ten impediments. 
These are: dwelling, family, gain, class (students), building, travel, 
relatives, affliction (sickness), books and super-normal powers. As 
regards dwelling, for those who cultivate samatha the dwelling is only 
an impediment if it distracts one or if one has many belongings stored 
there. As regards family, this refers to relatives or a family of 
supporters who present food or other requisites to the monk. They can 
be distracting from the development of calm. As regards gain, this 
means here the four requisites of the monk. If he receives requisites 
from people all the time, he has to give them blessings and teach them 
Dhamma. In this way he will be engaged continuously. Class means 
students of suttas or students of Abhidhamma. If the monk has to teach 
students he has no opportunity for the development of samatha. 
Building means the construction of a building. This is always an 
impediment for samatha since one is engaged in seeing to the work. 
Travel is an impediment for samatha since one's thoughts are occupied 
with the journey. With the impediment of relatives is also meant the 
monk's teacher or pupil or others he is dwelling together with. If 
they are sick they are an impediment for samatha since they preoccupy 
him. Affliction is any kind of illness. It is an impediment when it 
causes suffering. As regards books, this is responsibility for the 
scriptures, or recitation of the scriptures. When he is engaged with 
these matters it will distract him from the development of samatha. It 
is said that nine of the ten impediments are hindrances only for 
samatha. They distract one from its cultivation. As regards the tenth 
impediment, which are the supernatural powers of the non-ariyan, this 
is not a hindrance for samatha. We read in the Visuddhimagga (III, 56) 
about the super-normal powers: 

`They are hard to maintain, like a prone infant or like a baby hare, 
and the slightest thing breaks them. But they are an impediment for 
insight, not for concentration, since they are obtainable through 
concentration. So the supernormal powers are an impediment that should 
be severed by one who seeks insight; the others are impediments to be 
severed by one who seeks concentration.'

By these examples one sees that the method and aim of samatha is 
different from the method and aim of vipassanå. If one has 
accumulations to develop calm to a high degree one has to live a 
secluded life and the factors which are impediments to calm have to be 
severed. As regards insight, this has to be developed in one's daily 
life, one has to develop understanding of all realities which appear, 
one's defilements included. As we have seen, only super-normal powers 
are an impediment for insight since one cannot lead one's daily life 
if one wants to develop them. One has to live in seclusion and one has 
to develop calm to the degree of jhåna in order to be able to acquire 
the supernormal powers. The other factors which are impediments for 
samatha are not impediments for vipassanå. "Dwelling" is not a 
hindrance for the development of insight. We still have attachment to 
our house, we want to embellish it. So long as one is not an anågåmí 
(non-returner), attachment to sensuous objects has not been eradicated 
yet. Attachment to the place where we live and any other kind of 
attachment can be object of awareness when it appears and then it is 
not an impediment. If there is no right understanding of the object of 
satipaììhåna, everything hinders: the place where one lives, 
relatives, travelling or sickness. There always seems to be an excuse 
for not being aware right at this moment. First this work has to be 
finished, that letter has to be written, relatives need help and take 
up our time so that we believe that there is no opportunity for 
awareness. What is hindering us now? Are there not nåma and rúpa, 
right at this moment? There is impingement of hardness or softness on 
the bodysense, wherever we are. Hardness is a paramattha dhamma, an 
absolute reality, but when there is no awareness we do not know it as 
a reality. We may be thinking of hardness but that is not awareness. 
When sati-sampajañña arises the characteristic of hardness can be 
studied without there being the need to think about it. It can be 
known as a reality which is conditioned. It does not belong to anyone; 
we cannot change it, we cannot do anything about it.
One may think that awareness is too difficult, one may believe that 
one should first go to a quiet place. Why is that? Because one expects 
many moments of awareness and immediate clear comprehension. We should 
let go of expectations. If we have listened to the Dhamma and if we 
have understood the way to develop right understanding of nåma and 
rúpa, there are conditions for the arising of awareness. After a 
moment of awareness there are bound to be countless moments of 
unawareness since we accumulated ignorance for aeons. How could we get 
rid of it within a short time? If we think that awareness in daily 
life is too difficult we create a hindrance for the development of 
right understanding. If there is a beginning of the development of 
understanding now it can be accumulated. If that would be impossible 
there would be no ariyans who have realized the truth. They have 
proved that there are no impediments to the development of right 
understanding in daily life.




With mettå,




Nina van Gorkom








						Tokyo
						April 10 							
1971		Dear Mr. G.,

You asked me about the way to know the difference between nåma and 
rúpa. You find it difficult to realize their different 
characteristics. I will first summarize the points that you have 
doubts about:
When feeling hot, there are both nåma and rúpa. What is the 
characteristic of body-consciousness (kaya-viññåùa)? What is the 
characteristic of bodily feeling which accompanies body-consciousness? 
What are the characteristics of other feelings besides bodily feeling 
which arise at other moments? What is the characteristic of the rúpa 
which is heat? 
These are questions which are bound to arise when we learn about 
different nåmas and rúpas and we begin to be aware of them. There are 
different levels of understanding of realities. First there should be 
theoretical understanding about nåma and rúpa, and then one can begin 
to be aware of their characteristics when they appear. Through 
awareness direct understanding of realities can be developed. 
Body-consciousness is the citta which experiences rúpas which impinge 
on the body-sense. These rúpas can be the following: 
the "Element of Earth" or solidity, to be experienced as hardness or 
softness;
the "Element of Fire", to be experienced as heat or cold;
the "Element of Wind", to be experienced as motion or pressure. 
These rúpas impinge on the bodysense all the time. The body-sense 
through which these rúpas can be experienced is also rúpa. The 
bodysense does not know anything, but it is a condition for the nåma 
which experiences tangible object. The bodysense is to be found all 
over the body, except in those parts which are insensitive, such as 
hair or nails. The bodysense is not only on the outside of the body, 
but also inside the body. The Visuddhimagga (XIV, 52) states that it 
is to be found everywhere, like a liquid that soaks a layer of cotton. 
Also in those parts of the body we call "kidney" or "liver" there is 
bodysense; pain can be felt in these parts. When we notice any bodily 
sensation, be it ever so slight, it shows that there is impact on the 
bodysense. When we remember this it can be a condition for awareness 
of different kinds of realities, also when the impact on the bodysense 
is very slight, or inside the body.
All day long rúpas impinge on the bodysense but we do not realize that 
they are only rúpas. We always think of a being, the body or a thing 
which is touched, but these do not impinge on the bodysense. The 
experience of tangible object through the body-sense is one moment, 
and the thinking of stories about that object is another moment. There 
are different realities appearing at different moments through 
different doorways. This is the truth and it can be proven by our own 
experience. 
Body-consciousness which experiences tangible object impinging on the 
bodysense is vipåka-citta, a citta which is the result of kamma. When 
it experiences a pleasant tangible object it is the result of kusala 
kamma and when it experiences an unpleasant object it is the result of 
akusala kamma. When the object which impinges on the bodysense is 
pleasant the body-consciousness is accompanied by pleasant (bodily) 
feeling, and when the object is unpleasant the body-consciousness is 
accompanied by painful (bodily) feeling. There cannot be indifferent 
bodily feeling. The object is unpleasant when the temperature which 
impinges on the bodysense is too cold or too hot, and it is pleasant 
when the temperature is just right.
The pleasant feeling or painful feeling which accompanies 
body-consciousness is nåma, it experiences something. It is different 
from rúpa which does not experience anything. Since body-consciousness 
is vipåka, the accompanying feeling is also vipåka.
Body-consciousness which experiences tangible object arises in a 
process of cittas which experience that object. Each citta in a 
process performs it own function while it experiences the object which 
is impinging. The body-consciousness which is vipåka-citta falls away 
immediately and it is succeeded by other cittas. There are cittas 
arising within the process which can be kusala citta or akusala citta 
and they experience the same object as the body-consciousness. When 
they are kusala cittas they can be accompanied by happy (mental) 
feeling or by indifferent feeling, and when they are akusala cittas, 
they can be accompanied by happy (mental) feeling, by indifferent 
feeling or by unhappy (mental) feeling. These feelings can be called 
"mental feeling" in order to differentiate them from the bodily 
feeling which accompanies body-consciousness. As we have seen, bodily 
feeling is not rúpa, it is nåma. It can be called bodily feeling since 
it accompanies body-consciousness.
Sometimes we have an idea that painful feeling and aversion which can 
arise shortly afterwards can hardly be separated. However, they are 
different realities arising because of different conditions. When we 
burn ourselves the heat, which is an unpleasant tangible object, 
impinges on the bodysense and it is experienced by body-consciousness 
which is accompanied by painful bodily feeling. At that moment there 
is no dislike, the body-consciousness which is vipåka-citta, the 
result of kamma, merely experiences the unpleasant object. The painful 
feeling which accompanies the body-consciousness is also vipåka. It 
merely feels, it does not dislike the object. The citta with aversion, 
the dosa-múla-citta, which is accompanied by mental unpleasant feeling 
arises later on. It experiences the object with aversion, it is 
akusala citta. When sati arises it can be mindful of one reality at a 
time, and thus gradually different characteristics of realities can be 
known. If we try to "catch" realities and if we have desire to know 
whether the reality which appears is citta, feeling, rúpa or any other 
phenomenon, there is thinking with attachment, not mindfulness.
You wrote that you find that attachment, lobha, and aversion, dosa, 
can be known more easily than seeing or hearing. Can we say that 
anything is easy? We may think that it is easy to know lobha and dosa 
but do we realize their characteristics when they appear? Or are we 
merely thinking about them? Do we know them as conditioned nåmas, not 
self or is there still "my lobha" and "my dosa"? We should realize 
lobha and dosa also when they are of a lesser degree. For example, 
when there is seeing there is bound to be clinging to what is seen or 
clinging to seeing, arising closely after the seeing. When we hear a 
sound which is loud there can be a slight aversion but we may not even 
notice it. When there is lobha or dosa there are nåma and rúpa, there 
are so many realities we are still ignorant of. Lobha and dosa 
condition rúpas. Don't we look different when we are angry or when we 
are glad? When we are afraid or when we dislike something we may 
notice bodily phenomena conditioned by citta. It is not easy to 
distinguish between the different characteristics of realities. We 
tend to join different realities into a "whole" of "my personality" 
and thus we will not know them as they are, only nåma and rúpa, devoid 
of self.
In your letter you gave examples of moments of awareness. You write 
that when walking you are aware of the feeling of pressing the ground. 
Is there not thinking of a concept of "pressing the ground"? Do you 
picture yourself as walking? That is a way of thinking. The object one 
thinks of at that moment is a concept or idea, not a reality. We may 
easily mislead ourselves and take thinking for awareness. When you 
touch hardness and you know that it is hard is there clear 
understanding of the true nature of the rúpa which is hardness? There 
may still be "something" hard there which seems to stay. Does the 
ground seem to stay? Even when one does not name it "ground" or "feet" 
there can still be wrong understanding of reality. The rúpa which is 
hardness can be experienced through the bodysense and it arises and 
falls away, it cannot stay. Hardness seems to stay so long as we have 
not understood the truth of impermanence. We cling to sati and we want 
to hold on to realities in order to know them. We should not expect 
there to be full understanding of nåma and rúpa which arise and fall 
away, but we can learn to be aware of one characteristic of reality at 
a time when it appears. When we remember that realities and also 
awareness cannot last we will be less inclined to try to be aware and 
to hold on to realities. When it is the right time for sati it arises 
and then it can be aware of any reality which appears. We cannot plan 
to be aware of such or such reality.
You write that when eating you are aware of flavour. There is not only 
flavour, there is also the nåma which experiences flavour, otherwise 
flavour could not appear. Do we know already the difference between 
nåma and rúpa? There can be mindfulness of only one reality at a time, 
but it seems that flavour and the experience of it appear together. 
When understanding develops one reality can be known at a time, but 
now there is still confusion. You say that you can be aware of the 
movement of the jaws when eating. Again, is there not thinking of the 
idea of "my jaws" instead of being aware of one nåma or rúpa at a 
time? When we become more familiar with the characteristics of nåma 
and rúpa we will be less inclined to name them or to select a 
particular object of awareness.
Some people may be inclined to sit and wait for the appearing of 
hearing, sound, like or dislike. In that way realities will not be 
known. We can go on with all the things we usually do and we do not 
have to do anything special in order to have awareness. For instance, 
when one is writing, there may be sound, hearing, like, dislike or any 
other reality. When moving the hand hardness or motion may appear and 
these realities can be object of awareness. We should not mind what 
kind of reality presents itself. One may be trying to "catch" the 
difference between hearing and sound, seeing and visible object, but 
in that way realities will not be known. Sometimes there may be 
mindfulness of rúpa, sometimes of nåma, it all depends on the sati.
I am glad to hear that while you talk there can also be awareness. One 
may be inclined to think that it is impossible to be aware while 
talking, since one has to think of what one is going to say. Now you 
can prove to yourself that also at such moments there are nåmas and 
rúpas appearing. The thinking which occurs while one is talking is 
also a reality which can be object of awareness. If there never is 
awareness of thinking one cannot learn that thinking is anattå.
Our life consists of nåma and rúpa. When there is the development of 
awareness everything appears as usual, but before we did not know that 
what appears is a characteristic of reality. There is hearing, seeing 
or feeling all the time, but when there is no awareness we do not 
realize that they are only conditioned realities, nåmas. There is a 
reality at every moment but when we are forgetful we do not realize 
this. We should develop right understanding until we are familiar with 
the characteristics which appear, until there is no more doubt about 
them. When we are hungry or when we have a headache there are 
different kinds of nåma and rúpa. There is rúpa such as hardness, 
there are nåmas such as painful bodily feeling or unhappy mental 
feeling, there are many realities appearing. If there is no awareness 
when there is painful feeling we will think that pain can last for a 
while. When there is mindfulness we can find out that there are many 
other kinds of nåma and rúpa presenting themselves besides the pain 
caused by the impact on the bodysense. Pain does not stay, it falls 
away immediately, and then it arises again. 
We find our likes and dislikes very important. We let ourselves be 
carried away by like and dislike instead of being aware of different 
realities. We read in the Kindred Sayings ( IV, Saîåyatana-vagga, 
Kindred Sayings on Sense, Third Fifty, Chapter III, § 130, Håliddaka):

Once the venerable Kaccåna the Great was staying among the folk of 
Avanti, at Osprey's Haunt, on a sheer mountain crag.
Then the housefather Håliddakåni came to the venerable Kaccåna the 
Great. Seated at one side he said this:-
`It has been said by the Exalted One, sir, "Owing to diversity in 
elements arises diversity of contact. Owing to diversity of contact 
arises diversity of feeling". Pray, sir, how far is this so?'
`Herein, housefather, after having seen a pleasant object with the 
eye, a monk comes to know as such eye-consciousness that is a pleasant 
experience. Owing to contact that is pleasant to experience arises 
happy feeling.
After having seen with the eye an object that is unpleasant, a monk 
comes to know as such eye-consciousness that is an unpleasant 
experience. Owing to contact that is unpleasant to experience arises 
unhappy feeling.
After having seen with the eye an object that is of indifferent 
effect, a monk comes to know as such eye-consciousness that 
experiences an object which is of indifferent effect. Owing to contact 
that is indifferent to experience arises feeling that is indifferent.
So also, housefather, after having heard a sound with the ear, smelt a 
scent with the nose, tasted a flavour with the tongue, experienced 
tangible object with the body, cognized with the mind a mental object, 
that is pleasant¤Owing to contact that is pleasant to experience 
arises happy feeling. But after having cognized a mental object which 
is unpleasant¤owing to contact that is unpleasant to experience arises 
unhappy feeling. Again, after having cognized with the mind a mental 
object that is indifferent in effect, he comes to know as such 
mind-consciousness that experiences an object which is of indifferent 
effect. Owing to contact that is indifferent arises feeling that is 
indifferent.
Thus, housefather, owing to diversity in elements arises diversity of 
contact. Owing to diversity of contact arises diversity of feeling.' 

We do not come to know seeing, visible object, contact and feeling "as 
such" merely by just thinking about them. Paññå should realize the 
characteristic of seeing when it presents itself; it should realize 
seeing as nåma which arises because of conditions, not self. The nåma 
which sees is different from the rúpa which is visible object. When we 
learn to see realities as elements which arise because of conditions 
and which we cannot control, we will be less carried away by pleasant 
or unpleasant objects. We are attached to the feelings which arise on 
account of the objects which are experienced. Feeling accompanies each 
citta but we are mostly forgetful of feeling. Is there any 
understanding of the feeling which presents itself now? If there never 
is awareness of feeling there cannot be detachment from the idea of 
"my feeling".
There are realities appearing through the six doors, wherever we are. 
There is no need to go to a quiet place in order to know them. When we 
are in the company of many people, for example at a party, there are 
only realities appearing through the six doors and gradually we can 
learn to be aware of them. We see pleasant objects and on account of 
these we feel happy. However, we can remember that it is only feeling 
which feels, feeling which has arisen because of pleasant contact. We 
will see or hear unpleasant objects and owing to the unpleasant 
contact unhappy feeling is bound to arise. We will get tired when we 
have to stand for a long time while we listen to speeches and we may 
feel tense.There are only different realities appearing such as 
hardness or aversion. All the time there is diversity of elements, 
diversity of contact and owing to that contact diversity of feeling. 
We can consider the Dhamma wherever we are and if there is no clinging 
to sati there can be conditions for its arising. There cannot yet be 
the precise knowledge of realities but we can begin to learn.





With mettå,
	




Nina van Gorkom 






			

						
						Tokyo
						April 20 							
1971 		Dear Mr. G.,

I will repeat your question:
There is awareness, but not often of characteristics of nåma and rúpa. 
How can I get to know directly characteristics of realities?
Is there seeing now? It has a characteristic which can be directly 
experienced. It is a reality which can experience visible object 
through the eye-door. It is a type of nåma, not self.
Is there hearing now? That is another reality. It is a type of nåma 
which experiences sound through the ear-door. Hardness, softness, heat 
or cold appear time and again. They are different realities which each 
have their own characteristic. A characteristic of nåma or rúpa is not 
something besides that which can be experienced now, at this moment. 
All realities which appear have different characteristics and they can 
be experienced one at a time. Seeing is nåma, visible object is rúpa; 
they have different characteristics.
You wrote that you cannot distinguish the difference between seeing 
and thinking about what was seen, that they seem to occur at the same 
time. When we pay attention to the shape and form of something such as 
a chair there is thinking. However, are there not also moments of 
merely experiencing what appears through the eyesense, without there 
being thinking? There is not all the time thinking or defining of what 
something is. There are moments of seeing and seeing conditions 
thinking about what was seen, but they occur at different moments. One 
citta can have only one object at a time. We cannot expect to have 
precise understanding of realities, but we can begin to be aware of 
different realities. There are different degrees of knowing 
characteristics of nåma and rúpa and when paññå has been developed 
more, they will be known more clearly. They have to be known as nåma 
and as rúpa, not self.
The Buddha explained realities in different ways so that people would 
be able to know them as nåma elements and rúpa elements, as not self. 
We read in "An Exhortation from Nandaka" Middle Length Sayings (III, 
no.146) that the monk Nandaka had to preach to the nuns. Then the 
Buddha asked him to repeat to them exactly the same sermon. Why? Their 
"faculties", indriyas[1] , were developed and hearing the same sermon 
again would be the right condition for them to attain the degree of 
enlightenment for which they were ripe. How could that happen? Could 
it be just because they were listening and thinking about what they 
heard, or rather because there would be mindfulness while listening? 
While listening mindfulness can arise and it can be aware of seeing, 
hearing, thinking or feeling, of any reality appearing through one of 
the six doors. When I quote what Nandaka said, one may think, "Is that 
all?" However, when one listens, considers what one has heard and 
there can be mindfulness of realities one can come to know them as 
they are.
The conversation between Nandaka and the nuns reads:

"What do you think about this, sisters? Is the eye permanent or 
impermanent?"
"Impermanent, revered sir."
"But is what is impermanent anguish or happiness?"
"Anguish, revered sir."
"Is it right to regard that which is impermanent,anguish and liable to 
alteration as, `This is mine, this am I, this is myself '?"
"No, revered sir."
"What do you think about this, sisters? Is the ear¤the nose¤the 
tongue¤the bodysense¤the mind permanent or impermanent?¤Is it right to 
regard that which is impermanent, anguish and liable to alteration as, 
`This is mine, this am I, this is myself '?"
"No, revered sir. What is the reason for this? Already, revered sir, 
by means of perfect intuitive wisdom it has been well seen by us as it 
really is that,'These six internal sense-fields are impermanent' ". 

The six "internal sense-fields" (åyatanas) are the five senses and the 
mind. The same is said about the six "external sensefields": colours, 
sounds, smells, flavours, tangibles and mental objects. The same is 
said about the "six classes of consciousness" which experience these 
objects. Then Nandaka said:

"It is good, sisters, it is good. For it is thus, sisters, that by 
means of perfect intuitive wisdom this is seen by an ariyan disciple 
as it really is. It is, sisters, like the oil for lighting an oil-lamp 
which is impermanent and liable to alteration, and like the wick which 
is impermanent and liable to alteration, and like the flame which is 
impermanent and liable to alteration, and like the light which is 
impermanent and liable to alteration. If anyone, sisters, were to 
speak thus: `The oil for lighting this oil-lamp is impermanent and 
liable to alteration, and the wick¤and the flame is impermanent and 
liable to alteration, but that which is the light-that is permanent, 
lasting, eternal, not liable to alteration', speaking thus, sisters, 
would he be speaking rightly?"
"No, revered sir. What is the reason for this? It is, revered sir, 
that if the oil for lighting this oil-lamp be impermanent and liable 
to alteration, and if the wick¤and if the flame be impermanent and 
liable to alteration, all the more is the light impermanent and liable 
to alteration."
"Even so, sisters, if anyone should speak thus: `These six internal 
sense-fields are impermanent and liable to alteration, but whatever 
pleasure or pain or indifferent feeling I experience as a result of 
these six internal sense-fields, that is permanent, lasting, eternal, 
not liable to alteration.' speaking thus, sisters, would he be 
speaking rightly?"
"No, revered sir. What is the reason for this? As a result of this or 
that condition, revered sir, these or those feelings arise. From the 
stopping of this or that condition these or those feelings are 
stopped."

You wrote that awareness helps you to be less involved when unpleasant 
things happen. Sometimes there are conditions for sati and paññå, but 
when feelings are intense we tend to take them for self, we find it 
very difficult to see them as only conditioned realities, only nåma. 
Usually we are absorbed in what appears through eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, bodysense and mind, and we are forgetful of realities. 
At times we have to experience unpleasant objects through the senses. 
The other day someone hit me, meaning it as a joke. Feeling the impact 
of it was akusala vipåka through the body-sense. Why did this have to 
happen to me? At such moments one may be upset and there is no 
awareness. Of course, I know why it happened: it was the result of 
akusala kamma, a deed committed in the past. Thus we see that 
everything we have to experience are only conditioned realities, and 
also our like or dislike of what happens and our feelings about it are 
only conditioned realities. Our attachment or our dislike are not 
vipåka, they arise with akusala citta which is conditioned by our 
accumulated defilements. We had attachment and aversion in the past 
and therefore there are conditions for their arising today. There are 
different types of conditions which play their part in our life.
Now I shall continue with the sutta. Further on we read that Nandaka 
said:

"It is good, sisters, it is good. For it is thus, sisters, that by 
means of perfect intuitive wisdom this is seen by an ariyan disciple 
as it really is. It is, sisters, as if a clever cattle-butcher or a 
cattle-butcher's apprentice, having killed a cow, should dissect the 
cow with a butcher's sharp knife without spoiling the flesh within, 
without spoiling the outer hide, and with the butcher's sharp knife 
should cut, should cut around, should cut all around whatever tendons, 
sinews and ligaments there are within; and having cut, cut around, cut 
all around and removed the outer hide and, having clothed that cow in 
that self-same hide again, should then speak thus: `This cow is 
conjoined with this hide as before.' Speaking thus, sisters, would he 
be speaking rightly?"
"No, revered sir. What is the reason for this? Although, revered sir, 
that clever cattle-butcher or cattle-butcher's apprentice, having 
killed a cow¤having clothed that cow in that self-same hide again, 
might then speak thus:'This cow is conjoined with this hide as 
before,' yet that cow is not conjoined with that hide."
"I have made this simile for you, sisters, so as to illustrate the 
meaning. This is the meaning here: `the flesh within' sisters, is a 
synonym for the six internal sense-fields.`The outer hide', sisters, 
is a synonym for the six external sense-fields.`The tendons, sinews 
and ligaments within', sisters, is a synonym for delight and 
attachment. `The butcher's sharp knife', sisters, is a synonym for the 
ariyan intuitive wisdom, the ariyan intuitive wisdom by which one 
cuts, cuts around, cuts all around the inner defilements, the inner 
fetters and the inner bonds."
After Nandaka had finished his sermon and the nuns had departed, the 
Buddha said to the monks: "...although these nuns were delighted with 
Nandaka's teaching on Dhamma, their aspirations were not fulfilled." 

We then read:

Then the Lord addressed the venerable Nandaka, saying:
"Well then, Nandaka, you may exhort these nuns with this same 
exhortation again tomorrow." 

We read that after Nandaka had given the same sermon to the nuns for 
the second time the Buddha said:

"¤these nuns were delighted with Nandaka's teaching on Dhamma and 
their aspirations were fulfilled. She who is the last nun[2] of these 
five hundred nuns is a stream-winner (sotåpanna), not liable to the 
Downfall; she is assured, bound for self-awakening."

You might think that the nuns had understood the impermanence of 
conditioned realities already the first time, but there are many 
degrees of realizing the truth. The hearing of Nandaka's sermon for 
the second time was a condition for those who had not attained 
enlightenment to become sotåpanna, and for others who were already 
ariyans to attain higher stages of enlightenment.
Thus we can see that listening to the teachings or reading the 
scriptures are conditions for mindfulness and the development of 
paññå, and even for attaining enlightenment.
This sutta illustrates that the Buddha taught about all realities 
which can be experienced through the six doors. They appear all the 
time in daily life. Right understanding should be developed of these 
realities, there is no other way. Some people think that one should 
select particular objects of awareness, they believe that one should 
not be aware of all objects which appear. This is not the development 
of the Eightfold Path. If one is, for example, never aware of visible 
object which appears through the eyes one will continue to believe 
that people can be experienced through the eyesense. In reality only 
the rúpa which is visible object can be seen, but one is unable to 
eliminate the idea of "being"from the visible object. One should check 
whether paññå can eliminate doubt and ignorance about the 
characteristics of nåma and rúpa or not yet. It is not sufficient to 
be aware of what appears through one door only.
When the nuns listened to Nandaka's sermon they were considering and 
studying with awareness the characteristics of nåma and rúpa which 
appeared in order to understand them thoroughly. One should not merely 
repeat for oneself what one has heard about nåma and rúpa or merely 
follow what one's teacher said. One should develop understanding 
oneself of whatever appears through one of the six doors. One may 
believe that seeing and hearing are very clear, but this may be only 
thinking, not direct understanding of these realities. There should be 
the development of right understanding which knows nåma as nåma and 
rúpa as rúpa. Usually one is so absorbed in the object which appears 
that one forgets to be aware of the nåma which experiences the object. 
When visible object appears it is evident that there is also a reality 
which experiences it, a type of nåma. If there were no nåma which 
experiences visible object how could visible object appear? It is 
seeing which sees, no self who sees. There can be awareness of one 
reality at a time, a nåma or a rúpa and then one can learn their 
different characteristics.
In the above quoted sutta we read about the dissecting of a cow. When 
it has been dissected there is no longer the idea of a whole cow. When 
we join realities together into a "whole" there is the idea of a 
thing, a person, a self. When paññå directly realizes visible object 
as rúpa, not self, hardness as rúpa, not self, hearing as nåma, not 
self, and the other realities appearing one at a time as not self, the 
concept of a whole will disappear.
After I had typed the text about dissecting the cow, my husband and I 
were having dinner. While we were eating I was still busy "dissecting 
the cow". I liked the food and I remembered the words of the sutta 
that we are bound by delight and attachment. We are bound by these 
"tendons", but wisdom can cut them away. The scriptures can be a 
condition to consider different nåmas and rúpas which appear in daily 
life.
We are bound by attachment and delight with regard to what is 
experienced through the six doors. We like savours and tasting, we 
want to go on tasting. We like visible object and seeing, we want to 
go on seeing. We like sound and hearing, we want to go on hearing. We 
like thoughts and thinking, we want to go on thinking. Thus there are 
conditions to go on in the cycle of birth and death. It is because of 
clinging that we must be reborn. There will be the arising of nåma and 
rúpa in other existences, again and again.
Why did the nuns have to hear the same sermon again? Hearing it only 
once was not enough. We also would need to hear it again and again, 
many more times. We still cling to the internal sense-fields and the 
external sense-fields. That is why it is necessary to be aware of 
seeing, visible object, hearing, sound, of all realities which appear 
through the six doors, over and over again, without preference for a 
particular reality, without excluding any reality. Thus we have to be 
busy, "dissecting the cow " .
You asked me how we can realize the conditions for nåma and rúpa 
through being aware of them, and whether that is different from 
thinking about conditions.
There are different degrees of understanding conditions. We can have 
theoretical understanding of the fact that eyesense is a condition for 
seeing. Without eyesense there cannot be seeing. Seeing sees visible 
object or colour. Visible object is a condition for seeing by being 
its object. Seeing is vipåka-citta, it is produced by kamma. 
Kamma-condition is another type of condition. There are different 
types of conditions for the realities which arise.
Theoretical understanding of conditions is not the same as paññå which 
directly knows conditions for the nåma and rúpa which appear. This is 
a stage of insight which cannot arise before the beginning stage of 
insight which is the stage that paññå clearly distinguishes the 
difference between the characteristic of nåma and the characteristic 
of rúpa. Seeing is a reality which experiences visible object, it is 
not self but nåma. There is no need to think about this. Can the 
characteristic of seeing not be known when it appears? Seeing is 
different from visible object. Visible object is rúpa, it does not 
know anything. Hearing is a reality which experiences sound. It is 
different from sound which is rúpa, a reality which does not know 
anything. Through awareness of nåma and rúpa which appear one at a 
time paññå can come to realize that nåma is different from rúpa. When 
the first stage of insight arises there is no idea of a "whole", there 
are only different elements appearing one at a time. There is no idea 
of self who realizes nåma as nåma and rúpa as rúpa, but it is paññå 
which realizes this. How could paññå directly know conditions for nåma 
and rúpa when the difference between these realities has not been 
discerned yet? This would be impossible. Do seeing and visible object 
not seem to appear at the same time? Do hearing and sound not seem to 
appear at the same time? Do seeing and hearing not seem to appear at 
the same time? Is there an idea of the whole body? Don't we join all 
realities together into a "whole"? Is there not the whole of the 
world, the whole of a being, the whole of our personality? Is there an 
idea of self who is aware? We still have to study, to be aware of 
different realities, to discern their different characteristics. We 
have to learn such a great deal before the first stage of insight can 
arise. We don't even know whether it can arise during this life, that 
depends on understanding which has been accumulated, also in past 
lives.
It is after the first stage of insight that paññå can come to know 
directly nåma and rúpa as conditioned realities. This does not mean 
that there has to be thinking about all the different conditions for 
each reality. This stage of insight is different from our intellectual 
understanding at this moment of the different conditions for nåma and 
rúpa.
Some people think that knowing the conditions for aversion, dosa, 
would help to eliminate it. They think that knowing the conditions 
means thinking about the circumstances, the "story". However, that is 
not paññå which realizes conditions, it is thinking of concepts. Is 
there not an idea of "my dosa" about which one thinks? The way to 
eliminate dosa is the development of right understanding of all 
realities which appear. Only when one has attained the third stage of 
enlightenment dosa can be eradicated. It cannot be eradicated so long 
as the wrong view of self has not been eradicated. When dosa appears 
its characteristic can be studied so that it can be realized as only a 
conditioned reality, not "my dosa". The real cause of dosa is not the 
circumstances, not the other people. Our accumulations of dosa 
condition its arising. There were countless moments of dosa in the 
past and thus it can arise today. There is ignorance accompanying each 
moment of dosa, thus ignorance is a condition for it. There is no 
attachment, lobha, at the same time as dosa, but lobha is also a 
condition for dosa. We like pleasant objects and when the object is 
unpleasant there is aversion, we dislike it when we don't get what we 
want. Thus we see that there are several conditioning factors for 
realities, some of which arise at the same time and some of which do 
not arise at the same time. When we think about the "story", about the 
circumstances of dosa we do not come to know more about the reality of 
dosa. We have accumulations to think a great deal. When there is 
thinking it can be realized as just nåma, not self.
Ignorance about realities can never be eradicated by thinking. The 
Buddha explained about the realities appearing through the six doors 
in order to remind us to be aware of them over and over again. Only in 
that way ignorance and wrong view of realities can be eradicated. 
We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saîåyatana-vagga, Second Fifty, 
Chapter I, § 53, Ignorance):

`Then a certain monk came to the Exalted One, and on coming to him 
saluted him and sat down at one side. So seated that monk said this:
"By how knowing, lord, by how seeing does ignorance vanish and 
knowledge arise?"
"In him who knows and sees the eye as impermanent, monk, ignorance 
vanishes and knowledge arises. In him who knows and sees visible 
objects...seeing-consciousness...the 
ear¤sounds...hearing-consciousness...the 
tongue...flavours¤tasting-consciousness...the 
nose...smells¤smelling-consciousness...the 
body...touches...body-consciousness...the 
mind...mind-states...mind-consciousness...as impermanent, ignorance 
vanishes and knowledge arises." '



With mettå, 





Nina van Gorkom 






						Tokyo
						May 10								
1971 		Dear Mr. G.,

You wrote to me about concentration on breathing and since many people 
are interested in this subject I will quote from your letter:
I find that while I concentrate on breathing sensations and thoughts 
are blotted out and in this way I become more relaxed and I have less 
aversion. I find that after this exercise mindfulness becomes more 
acute and frequent. Seeing and hearing seem so clear, and all six 
doors are wide open, registering with clarity and intensity 
everything. The situation is like a spider in a web, ready to catch, 
but without tension. I find that by means of concentration on 
breathing, I can create favourable conditions for wisdom of the 
Eightfold Path. I believe that I can be mindful more often when I am 
relaxed. 
Your letter raises many questions with regard to samatha and 
vipassanå. Some people have accumulations to develop both samatha and 
vipassanå; others develop only samatha and others again only 
vipassanå. Both for the development of samatha and for the development 
of vipassanå, it is essential to have right understanding of the way 
of development. It is felt by some that for samatha it is not 
necessary to know about realities, to know one's different types of 
citta, since one should, as they believe, just concentrate until 
sense-impressions are "blotted out". However, this is not the right 
way of development. If one starts to concentrate for example on 
breathing, without understanding when the citta is kusala citta and 
when akusala citta, one will take attachment to breathing for the calm 
which accompanies kusala citta. One does not know the difference 
between samatha and what is not samatha but merely a 
breathing-exercise. When one has a sensation of sense-impressions 
being blotted out one mistakenly believes that one has attained jhåna 
(absorption). We should understand which cause brings which effect. If 
one wants to apply oneself to mindfulness of breathing one should note 
that just concentration on one's breathing is not samatha. People 
concentrate on their breathing for various reasons: for example 
because it is good for one's health and it makes one feel more 
relaxed. 
Mindfulness of breathing is among the meditation subjects of samatha 
and as such it is quite different from any other kind of concentration 
on breathing. The aim of samatha is to be less attached to 
sense-impressions, and, in order to reach this aim, it is essential 
that there is right understanding of the way to develop true calm. 
True calm is wholesome, at that moment there are no lobha, dosa or 
moha. We read about people in the Buddha's time who could develop calm 
to the degree of jhåna. When jhåna is attained defilements are 
temporarily eliminated, but they are not eradicated. There are many 
misunderstandings about the development of samatha and if it is not 
developed in the right way one develops wrong concentration, 
micchå-samådhi, instead of calm. 
I have heard people say that they want to become less restless and to 
have more calm, and that they therefore want to apply themselves to 
samatha. However, do they know the real meaning of restlessness and 
calm?
"Restlessness", in Påli uddhacca, is akusala. It is a cetasika which 
arises with each akusala citta: with lobha-múla-citta (citta rooted in 
attachment), with dosa-múla-citta (citta rooted in aversion) and with 
moha-múla-citta (citta rooted in ignorance). It prevents the citta 
from wholesomeness. Uddhacca is different from what one in 
conventional language calls "restlessness". When we use the word 
"restlessness" in conventional language we usually think of aversion 
and unpleasant feeling. People dislike unpleasant feeling and they 
like pleasant feeling or indifferent feeling. However, pleasant 
feeling and indifferent feeling can accompany both kusala citta and 
akusala citta. If one pays attention only to feeling and one does not 
know when the citta is kusala citta and when akusala citta one's life 
is very confused. For instance, when one is in quiet surroundings, one 
may be attached to quietness and thus there are at that moment 
lobha-múla-cittas which can be accompanied by pleasant feeling or by 
indifferent feeling. Since lobha-múla-citta is akusala citta it is 
accompanied by restlessness. Or, there may be moha-múla-cittas which 
are accompanied by indifferent feeling. Moha-múla-citta is also 
accompanied by restlessness. Thus, when the feeling is pleasant or 
indifferent, the citta may be akusala citta and in that case it is 
inevitably accompanied by restlessness. Although one believes that one 
is calm at that moment, one still has restlessness. Do we realize it 
whether the pleasant feeling or indifferent feeling which arises is 
kusala or akusala? We have theoretical knowledge of kusala and 
akusala, but in order to develop what is wholesome we must know 
whether the citta at this moment is kusala or akusala. Attachment to 
calm may be very subtle, one may not notice it. Lobha can lure us all 
the time. Only paññå can know whether the citta which arises is kusala 
or akusala.
In conventional language we use the word "calm". We should know which 
kind of reality calm is. Calm, in Påli passaddhi, is a cetasika. In 
fact, there are two cetasikas: kåya-passaddhi, tranquillity of body, 
and citta-passaddhi, tranquillity of mind. By kåya, body, is meant 
here the "mental body", which are the cetasikas (the three 
nåma-kkhandhas which are vedåna-kkhandha, feeling, saññå-kkhandha, 
perception, and saòkhåra-kkhandha, the "formations") as distinct from 
citta (Visuddhimagga XIV, 144). Thus, there is calm of cetasikas and 
calm of citta. 
We read in the Visuddhimagga (XIV, 144):

` ...But both tranquillity of that body and of consciousness have, 
together, the characteristic of quieting disturbance of that body and 
of consciousness. Their function is to crush disturbance of the 
(mental) body and of consciousness. They are manifested as inactivity 
and coolness of the (mental) body and of consciousness...' 

The two cetasikas which are calm of "body" and calm of citta arise 
with each kusala citta, no matter whether one is performing dåna 
(generosity), observing síla (morality), developing samatha or 
vipassanå. Thus, also while we are generous or abstain from lying 
there is calm: at such moments there are no lobha, dosa or moha 
accompanying the citta. When there are moments of mettå, 
lovingkindness, towards someone we meet, there is true calm. Mettå is 
a subject of samatha, but it can and should be developed in daily 
life, when we are in the company of other people. We should not 
confuse mettå with selfish affection, we should know that when there 
is pure lovingkindness we do not expect anything in return, we do not 
want anything for ourselves. When we hear the word samatha we may 
think that one has to develop it in quiet surroundings until jhåna is 
attained. However, there can be moments of calm, samatha, in daily 
life if there is right understanding, paññå, which knows when the 
citta is kusala citta and when akusala citta. We should not believe 
that this is easy. Those who have accumulations for jhåna can develop 
calm to the degree of jhåna, but only very few people are able to. We 
do not know whether there are at the present time people who are able 
to attain jhåna. When jhåna is attained defilements are temporarily 
eliminated.
There is calm when one develops vipassanå. When one is aware of a 
characteristic of nåma or rúpa there is kusala citta which is 
accompanied by calm. Moreover, vipassanå leads to the eradication of 
wrong view and the other defilements. The arahat has eradicated all 
latent tendencies of defilements and thus he has the highest degree of 
calm.
When the citta is not intent on dåna, síla or bhåvåna, mental 
development, there is no calm, passaddhi. Concentration on breathing 
with the aim to become relaxed is not a way of kusala kamma, it is not 
samatha. There is then no passaddhi with the citta, even if one thinks 
that one is feeling calm. At such a moment there may not be dosa, but 
lobha and moha are bound to arise.
Right understanding of what is kusala and what is akusala will prevent 
us from taking for samatha what is not samatha. If one believes that 
one can develop calm to the degree of jhåna, one should know about the 
many conditions which have to be fulfilled in order to attain it. If 
one understands how difficult it is to attain jhåna one will not 
mislead oneself and believe that one has attained it when there is a 
sensation of sense-impressions being blotted out or other unusual 
experiences. The person who wants to develop samatha to the degree of 
jhåna should lead a secluded life and he should not spend his time 
with various entertainments such as one enjoys while leading a worldly 
life. One should really see the disadvantages of sense-pleasures and 
one should have the intention to cultivate the conditions for being 
away from them. If the right conditions are not fulfilled there cannot 
even be access-concentration (upacåra-samadhi)[3] nor can there be the 
attainment of jhåna.
The Visuddhimagga (XII, 8) explains how difficult even the preliminary 
work is, and how difficult access-concentration and jhåna are. We read 
about each stage:"One in a hundred or thousand can do it." If one 
leads a worldly life and is busy with one's daily tasks there are no 
favourable conditions for jhåna. One cannot expect to attain jhåna if 
one just for a little while every day concentrates on breathing. 
Moreover, it is not concentration which should be stressed but right 
understanding, paññå. There must be right understanding of breath 
which is rúpa, conditioned by citta. It appears at the nose-tip or 
upper-lip, but it is very subtle. We should remember that mindfulness 
of breathing is one of the most difficult subjects of meditation. 
We read in the Visuddhimagga (VIII, 211):

`¤But this mindfulness of breathing is difficult, difficult to 
develop, a field in which only the minds of Buddhas, Pacceka Buddhas, 
and Buddhas' sons are at home. It is no trivial matter, nor can it be 
cultivated by trivial persons¤`

Buddhas' sons were the great disciples who had accumulated excellent 
qualities and skill for jhåna. Who can pretend to be among them?
Mindfulness of breathing is a meditation subject of samatha and it is 
also included in one of the Four Applications of Mindfulness, 
Satipaììhåna, under the section of Mindfulness of the Body. Thus, it 
can be applied in samatha and in vipassanå. We have to study this 
subject very carefully in order to avoid misunderstandings. The 
Visuddhimagga (Chapter VIII, 145-146) quotes the sutta about 
mindfulness of breathing in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahå-vagga, Book 
X, Chapter I, § I). This sutta also occurs in other parts of the 
Tipiìaka[4]. I will quote the sutta text and then refer to the word 
commentary of the Visuddhimagga, in order that this sutta will be more 
clearly understood. We should note that there is a division into four 
sections of four clauses each in this sutta which, in the Visuddhimagga
, are marked from I-XVI. The sutta states:

It has been described by the Blessed One as having sixteen bases thus: 
`And how developed, bhikkhus, how practised much is concentration 
through mindfulness of breathing both peaceful and sublime, an 
unadulterated blissful abiding, banishing at once and stilling evil 
unprofitable thoughts as soon as they arise?
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree 
or to an empty place, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise, set 
his body erect, established mindfulness in front of him, ever mindful 
he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.
(I) Breathing in long, he knows "I breathe in long"; or breathing out 
long, he knows "I breathe out long".
(II) Breathing in short, he knows "I breathe in short"; or breathing 
out short, he knows "I breathe out short". (III) He trains thus "I 
shall breathe in experiencing the whole body"; he trains thus "I shall 
breathe out experiencing the whole body". (IV) He trains thus "I shall 
breathe in tranquillizing the bodily activity"; he trains thus "I 
shall breathe out tranquillizing the bodily activity".
(V) He trains thus "I shall breathe in experiencing happiness"; he 
trains thus "I shall breathe out experiencing happiness". (VI) He 
trains thus "I shall breathe in experiencing bliss"; he trains thus "I 
shall breathe out experiencing bliss". (VII) He trains thus "I shall 
breathe in experiencing the mental formation"; he trains thus "I shall 
breathe out experiencing the mental formation". (VIII) He trains thus 
"I shall breathe in tranquillizing the mental formation"; he trains 
thus "I shall breathe out tranquillizing the mental formation".
(IX) He trains thus "I shall breathe in experiencing the (manner of) 
consciousness"; he trains thus "I shall breathe out experiencing the 
(manner of) consciousness". (X) He trains thus "I shall breathe in 
gladdening the (manner of) consciousness"; he trains thus "I shall 
breathe out gladdening the (manner of) consciousness". (XI) He trains 
thus "I shall breathe in concentrating the (manner of) consciousness"; 
he trains thus "I shall breathe out concentrating the (manner of) 
consciousness". (XII) He trains thus "I shall breathe in liberating 
the (manner of) consciousness"; he trains thus "I shall breathe out 
liberating the (manner of) consciousness".
(XIII) He trains thus "I shall breathe in contemplating impermanence"; 
he trains thus "I shall breathe out contemplating impermanence". (XIV) 
He trains thus "I shall breathe in contemplating fading away"; he 
trains thus "I shall breathe out contemplating fading away". (XV) He 
trains thus "I shall breathe in contemplating cessation"; he trains 
thus "I shall breathe out contemplating cessation". (XVI) He trains 
thus "I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment"; he trains thus 
"I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment". 

The Visuddhimagga (VIII, 186) describes the procedure of someone who 
wants to develop mindfulness of breathing until he has attained the 
fourth jhåna, and who then develops insight and through insight based 
on the fourth jhåna attains arahatship. We should not misunderstand 
the words "insight based on the fourth jhåna". It does not mean that 
he can forego the different stages of insight-knowledge, starting with 
the "defining of materiality-mentality" (nåma-rúpa pariccheda-ñåùa), 
which is knowing the difference between the characteristic of nåma and 
the characteristic of rúpa. For example, when there is hearing there 
is sound as well, but their characteristics are different and they can 
only be known one at a time. Right understanding of the reality 
appearing at the present moment should be developed until there is no 
longer confusion as to the difference between the characteristics of 
nåma and rúpa. So long as this stage of insight has not been reached 
yet we are not sure whether the reality which appears at the present 
moment is nåma or rúpa. 
Someone said that if one continues to concentrate on breathing the day 
will come when one realizes that this body is supported by mere 
breathing and that it perishes when breathing ceases. He said that in 
that way one fully realizes impermanence. However, the impermanence of 
conditioned realities will not be realized if the right cause has not 
been cultivated: awareness and understanding of different kinds of 
nåma and rúpa as they present themselves one at a time through the six 
doors. 
Those who develop both jhåna and vipassanå should, after the 
jhånacitta has fallen away, be aware of nåma and rúpa, clearly know 
their different characteristics and develop all stages of insight (
Visuddhimagga VIII, 223 and following). It depends on the accumulated 
wisdom whether the different stages of insight can be realized within 
a short time or whether they are developed very gradually during a 
long period of time.
In the word commentary to the above quoted sutta the Visuddhimagga 
(VIII, 223-226) mentions with regard to the first tetrad (group of 
four clauses, marked I-IV) of the sutta the different stages of 
insight-knowledge which are developed after emerging from jhåna. We 
read:

`After he has thus reached the four noble paths in due succession and 
has become established in the fruition of arahatship, he at last 
attains to the nineteen kinds of "Reviewing Knowledge", and he becomes 
fit to receive the highest gifts from the world with its deities.' 

It is evident that only those who had accumulated great wisdom could 
attain jhåna with "mindfulness of breathing" as meditation subject, 
and then attain arahatship. This is beyond the capacity of ordinary 
people.
As regards the second tetrad (marked V-VIII), the Visuddhimagga (VIII, 
226) comments:

`(V) He trains thus "I shall breathe in¤shall breathe out experiencing 
happiness", that is, making happiness (píti, also translated as 
rapture) known, making it plain. Herein, the happiness is experienced 
in two ways: (a) with the object, and (b) with non-confusion.'

As regards "happiness experienced with the object", the Visuddhimagga 
(VIII, 227) explains:

`How is happiness experienced with the object? He attains the two 
jhånas in which happiness (píti) is present.[5] At the time when he has 
actually entered upon them the happiness is experienced with the 
object owing to the obtaining of the jhåna, because of the 
experiencing of the object.'

After the jhånacitta has fallen away paññå realizes the characteristic 
of píti as it is: only a kind of nåma, which is impermanent and not 
self. We read:

`¤How with non-confusion? When, after entering upon and emerging from 
one of the two jhånas accompanied by píti, he comprehends with insight 
that happiness associated with the jhåna as liable to destruction and 
fall, then at the actual time of insight the happiness is experienced 
with non-confusion owing to the penetration of its characteristics (of 
impermanence, and so on). '

In a similar way the words of the second tetrad are explained: "(VI) I 
shall breathe in¤breathe out experiencing bliss (sukha)¤" 
Sukha occurs in three stages of jhåna (of the fourfold system); it 
does not arise in the highest stage of jhåna where there is equanimity 
instead of sukha. Sukha accompanies the jhånacitta of the three stages 
of jhåna and is, after the jhånacitta has fallen away, realized by 
paññå as impermanent.
As regards the words in the third tetrad: "(X) I shall breathe 
in...breathe out gladdening the (manner of) consciousness", the 
Visuddhimagga (VIII, 231) states that there is gladdening in two ways, 
namely through concentration and through insight. We read:

`How through concentration? He attains the two jhånas in which 
happiness is present. At the time when he has actually entered upon 
them he inspires the mind with gladness, instils gladness into it, by 
means of the happiness associated with the jhåna. How through insight? 
After entering upon and emerging from one of the two jhånas 
accompanied by happiness he comprehends with insight that happiness 
associated with the jhåna as liable to destruction and to fall, thus 
at the actual time of insight he inspires the mind with gladness, 
instils gladness into it by making the happiness associated with jhåna 
the object.'

As regards the clause: "(XII) I shall breathe in¤breathe out 
liberating the (manner of) consciousness", the Visuddhimagga explains 
that this also must be understood as pertaining to jhåna as well as to 
insight. In the first jhåna one is liberated from the "hindrances", 
although they are not eradicated, and in each subsequent stage of 
jhåna one is liberated from the jhåna-factors, specific cetasikas 
which are developed in order to eliminate the hindrances. The 
jhåna-factors are subsequently abandoned when one is no longer 
dependent on them and one is able to attain a higher and more subtle 
stage of jhåna. After emerging from jhåna the jhånacitta is 
comprehended with insight. 
We read (Visuddhimagga VIII, 233): 

`¤at the actual time of insight he delivers, liberates the mind from 
the perception of permanence by means of the contemplation of 
impermanence, from the perception of pleasure by means of the 
contemplation of dukkha (suffering), from the perception of self by 
means of the contemplation of not self...'

As regards the words of the fourth tetrad, "(XIII) I shall breathe 
in¤breathe out contemplating impermanence", the Visuddhimagga (VIII, 
234) states:

` ¤Impermanence is the rise and fall and change in those same 
khandhas, or it is their non-existence after having been; the meaning 
is, it is the break-up of produced khandhas through their momentary 
dissolution since they do not remain in the same mode. Contemplation 
of impermanence is contemplation of materiality, etc., as 
"impermanent" in virtue of that impermanence...' 

Further on the Visuddhimagga (VIII, 237) states about the fourth 
tetrad,

`This tetrad deals only with pure insight while the previous three 
deal with serenity and insight.'

As regards the clause: "(XIV) I shall breathe in¤breathe out 
contemplating fading away", the Visuddhimagga states that there are 
two kinds of fading away, namely: "fading away as destruction" which 
is the "momentary dissolution of formations" (conditioned realities) 
and "absolute fading away" which is nibbåna. The text (Visuddhimagga 
VIII, 235) states:

`¤Contemplation of fading away is insight and it is the path, which 
occur as the seeing of these two. It is when he possesses this twofold 
contemplation that it can be understood of him "He trains thus, I 
shall breathe in¤shall breathe out contemplating fading away." '

The same method of explanation is applied to the clause "contemplating 
cessation". And with regard to the clause (XVI) "contemplating 
relinquishment", the Visuddhimagga states: 

"relinquishment is of two kinds too, that is to say, relinquishment as 
giving up, and relinquishment as entering into."

"Giving up" is the giving up of defilements, and "entering into" is 
the entering into nibbåna, the Visuddhimagga explains. Also this 
clause pertains to insight alone. 
It is extremely difficult to develop jhåna and we should not think 
that it will be easier to develop insight if one tries to develop 
jhåna first. In the following sutta we read about "canker-destruction" 
depending on jhåna. It is clearly explained in what sense we should 
understand this. We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Nines, 
Chapter VI, § 5, Musing):

`Verily, monks, I say canker-destruction depends on the first jhåna 
("musing")¤And wherefore is this said?
Consider the monk who, aloof from sense-desires¤enters and abides in 
the first jhåna: whatever occurs there of rúpa, feeling, perception, 
activities (saùkhåra) or consciousness, he sees wholly as impermanent 
phenomena, as ill, as a disease, a boil, a sting, a hurt, an 
affliction, as something alien, gimcrack, empty, not the self. He 
turns his mind away from such phenomena and, having done so, brings 
the mind towards the deathless element with the thought: 
"This is the peace, this the summit, just this: the stilling of all 
mind-activity, the renouncing of all (rebirth) basis, the destroying 
of craving, passionlessness, ending, the cool." And steadfast therein 
he wins to canker-destruction; if not¤just by reason of that Dhamma 
zest, that Dhamma sweetness, he snaps the five lower fetters and is 
born spontaneously and, being not subject to return from that world, 
becomes completely cool there.' 

The same is said with regard to the other stages of jhåna. There can 
be no "canker-destruction", even for those who develop jhåna, unless 
the five khandhas, the conditioned nåmas and rúpas, are known as they 
are. Are there not five khandhas now, no matter what kind of citta 
arises, be it kusala citta or akusala citta? When something hard 
impinges on the bodysense, are there not five khandhas? Do we know 
already the difference between hardness and the nåma which experiences 
hardness? Hardness could not appear if there were no nåma which 
experiences it. It is not self who experiences it. Do we know the 
characteristic of painful feeling when it appears and the 
characteristic of aversion towards the pain? Different realities 
appear one at a time and when there is mindfulness they can be known 
as they are. Later on they can be realized as impermanent and not 
self. We should not forget that each moment of right understanding now 
eventually leads to "the destroying of craving, passionlessness, 
ending, the cool." It leads to "canker-destruction".


With mettå



Nina van Gorkom





						


						
						Tokyo
						May 25 								
1971 		Dear Mr. G.,

In my previous letter I quoted the sutta on Mindfulness of Breathing 
in the Kindred Sayings (V) and the word commentary of the Visuddhimagga
, I will now continue with this subject. In the "Discourse on 
Mindfulness of Breathing" in the Middle Length Sayings (III, 118) we 
read that mindfulness of breathing, when developed, brings to 
fulfilment the four applications of mindfulness. The four applications 
of mindfulness are mindfulness of the body, of feelings, of cittas and 
of dhammas. We read:

`And how, monks, when mindfulness of in-breathing and out-breathing is 
developed, how when it is made much of, does it bring the four 
applications of mindfulness to fulfilment? At the time, monks, when a 
monk breathing in¤breathing out a long breath¤a short breath 
comprehends, "I am breathing in¤breathing out a long breath¤a short 
breath"; when he trains himself, thinking, "I will breathe in¤breathe 
out experiencing the whole body¤tranquillizing the activity of the 
body," at that time, monks, the monk is faring along contemplating the 
body in the body, ardent, clearly conscious (of it), mindful (of it) 
so as to control the covetousness and dejection in the world¤the monk 
trains himself, thinking, "I will breathe in experiencing rapture 
(píti)¤I will breathe out experiencing rapture¤I will breathe 
in¤breathe out experiencing joy (sukha)¤I will breathe in¤breathe out 
experiencing the activity of thought¤I will breathe in¤breathe out 
tranquillizing the activity of thought"; at that time, monks, the monk 
is faring along contemplating the feelings in the feelings, ardent, 
clearly conscious (of them), mindful (of them) so as to control the 
covetousness and dejection in the world...' 

We then read that the monk, when he is developing mindfulness of 
breathing, contemplates citta in citta and dhamma in dhamma. Further 
on we read that the four applications of mindfulness bring the seven 
enlightenment factors to fulfilment. The seven enlightenment factors 
bring to fulfilment freedom through knowledge. 
From the quotations of the Visuddhimagga in my previous letter we have 
seen that those who first develop samatha to the degree of jhåna and 
then develop insight, still have to be aware, after they emerge from 
jhåna, of the realities which appear. They should, for example, 
realize the rapture and joy experienced in jhåna, as only nåmas which 
are impermanent and not self. If one develops insight "based on 
jhåna", one should have the "fivefold mastery" (Visuddhimagga IV, 
131), one should be able to attain jhåna and emerge from it at any 
time and in any place. Then the jhånacitta is for such a person a 
reality which naturally appears in his daily life. Only thus can it be 
object of mindfulness. 
The Buddha encouraged people to be mindful while walking, eating, 
talking, in short, while doing all the things they would normally do. 
He did not say that samatha is a necessary requirement for the 
development of vipassanå. To those who had accumulated great wisdom 
and skill and who were inclined to the development of mindfulness of 
breathing, he explained how the development of this subject could bear 
great fruit, how it could bring the four applications of mindfulness 
to fulfilment. In being aware of nåma and rúpa one will learn to see 
the body in the body, feelings in the feelings, citta in citta and 
dhamma in dhamma. One will realize nåma and rúpa as not self. Then the 
four applications of mindfulness will be brought to fulfilment.
Samatha and vipassanå are two different ways of mental development, 
bhåvanå. The aim of samatha is to eliminate attachment to sense 
objects, and the aim of vipassanå is to eradicate ignorance of 
realities. Some people want to apply themselves to samatha first, 
because they think that in this way vipassanå can be developed more 
quickly afterwards. They should realize, however, that both samatha 
and vipassanå are ways of mental development. The Påli term bhåvanå 
means: to make become, to produce, to increase. Developing first 
samatha before vipassanå is certainly not a "short cut" to nibbåna as 
some people believe. Those who want to develop samatha should do so 
only if they really have accumulated skill for samatha. If one wants 
to apply oneself to a meditation subject, one needs a great deal of 
preparation, one has to lead a secluded life and many conditions have 
to be fulfilled. Right understanding of the way to develop calm with 
the meditation subject is essential. If one just sits without any 
understanding, is that mental development? For the attainment of 
"access-concentration" and jhåna one needs perseverance with the 
development and one has to acquire great skill. Samatha, when it is 
really developed, is a way of kusala which is of a high degree. Jhåna 
purifies the mind, but the latent tendencies of defilements are not 
eradicated. After the jhånacitta has fallen away defilements are bound 
to arise again. As we have seen, those who have attained jhåna should 
still develop all the stages of insight in order to become enlightened.
One may apply oneself to samatha, but if one does not have 
accumulations for the attainment of jhåna, or even access 
concentration, one should consider for oneself whether it is 
beneficial or not to continue developing samatha. Even while one 
applies oneself to a meditation subject akusala cittas still arise; 
the hindrances are not suppressed until one has attained 
access-concentration and jhåna.
Vipassanå is to be developed in our daily life. If it is not developed 
in daily life we will not come to know our accumulated inclinations. 
Also our defilements should be known as they are, as conditioned 
nåmas, otherwise they cannot be eradicated. Vipassanå leads eventually 
to the eradication of defilements. It leads to the "ariyan calm" which 
is the highest degree of calm. We read in the "Discourse on the 
Analysis of the Elements" (Middle Length Sayings III, number. 140):

"For this, monks, is the highest ariyan calm, that is to say the calm 
with regard to attachment, hatred and ignorance..."

It is still felt by some that if they apply themselves to samatha, 
even if they have not accumulated skill for jhåna, it would help them 
with the development of vipassanå. If one wants to use samatha as a 
way to attain enlightenment more quickly one should consider whether 
this is motivated by lobha or not. We should also know that sati and 
paññå in samatha are different from sati and paññå in vipassanå. In 
samatha there should be mindfulness and right understanding of the 
meditation subject and paññå should know when there is true calm, 
freedom from akusala. In vipassanå there is mindfulness of the nåma or 
rúpa which appears at the present moment through one of the six doors, 
so that paññå can realize them as not self. If one confuses the 
different ways of development of samatha and vipassanå, there will not 
be right understanding of cause and effect. One may erroneously think 
that the development of samatha is the way to obtain a great deal of 
sati of the Eightfold Path.
It is understandable that those who are discouraged about their 
akusala cittas and lack of mindfulness want to make special efforts to 
cause mindfulness to arise more frequently. As you wrote in your 
letter, you thought that concentration on breathing was for you the 
right condition for mindfulness of the Eightfold Path. You found that 
after this exercise the six doors were wide open; seeing and hearing 
seemed so clear. You felt like a spider in a web, ready to catch.
If there is mindfulness right now of, for example, sound or hardness, 
what is the condition for mindfulness? Is it necessary to concentrate 
on breathing first, in order to become more relaxed? We should 
remember the sutta in which are mentioned the four conditions, 
necessary for the attainment of the first stage of enlightenment, the 
stage of the sotåpanna (streamwinner). We read in the Kindred Sayings 
(V, Mahå-vagga, Book XI, Kindred Sayings on Streamwinning, Chapter I, 
§ 5) that the Buddha said to Såriputta:

` "A limb of stream-winning! A limb of stream-winning!" is the saying, 
Såriputta. Tell me, Såriputta, of what sort is a limb of 
stream-winning?
Lord, association with the upright is a limb of stream-winning. 
Hearing the good Dhamma is a limb of stream-winning. Applying the mind 
is a limb of stream-winning. Conforming to the Dhamma is a limb of 
stream-winning
Well said, Såriputta! Well said, Såriputta! Indeed these are limbs of 
stream-winning....'

If we had not met the right person and listened to the Dhamma, if 
mindfulness of nåma and rúpa had not been explained to us, could there 
be "applying the mind", which is "wise consideration", and "conforming 
to the Dhamma", which is the practice of the Eightfold Path? Could 
there be awareness of nåma and rúpa, right at this moment? Mindfulness 
and understanding are still weak, but, when one has listened to the 
Dhamma, there can be a beginning of the study of different realities 
which appear.
You felt like a spider in a web, ready to catch. When there is a 
thought of catching realities, there is a concept of self. Realities 
appear and if there are conditions for mindfulness it arises. It may 
arise or it may not, this does not depend on a self. Seeing and 
hearing seemed so clear to you. When are these realities clear? Only 
when paññå realizes the characteristics of seeing and hearing as not 
self, not when we have a sensation that they are clear. Can we say 
that anything is clear when we do not even know the difference between 
seeing and visible object, hearing and sound?
You thought that after concentration on breathing, when you were 
relaxed, awareness was frequent and acute. How much understanding is 
there? Which realities are understood? If there is no right 
understanding we may take for awareness what is not the right 
awareness. The realities which appear through the six doors at this 
moment have to be understood. They cannot be understood immediately, 
but we can begin to study them with awareness. Is there not something 
which appears through the eyes now? We do not have to think about it 
or to define it in order to experience it. We can call it visible 
object or colour, it does not matter how we name it; it is just that 
which appears through the eyes. When we think that it is a particular 
person or thing, we are thinking of concepts. A concept is not visible 
object, it is formed up by our thinking. A concept is not a reality 
and thus it is not the object of right understanding in the 
development of vipassanå. Do we know the difference between concepts 
and nåma and rúpa, the realities which can be directly experienced, 
without there being the need to think about them? It is essential to 
know the difference, otherwise we will continue confusing thinking and 
awareness, and then vipassanå cannot be developed. When visible object 
appears it is evident that there must also be a reality which 
experiences it, otherwise it could not appear. Seeing which 
experiences visible object is not self, it is only a type of nåma. 
Seeing can be studied with mindfulness when there is seeing, and there 
is seeing time and again. There is seeing now. We used to live in the 
world of our thoughts, of concepts, but now we can begin to study 
realities such as seeing, visible object, hearing or sound. We are not 
used to doing this but when we see the value of knowing what is real, 
not a concept or idea, there will be conditions to study realities. We 
are ignorant about all the realities of our daily life. It seems to us 
that there are seeing and thinking about what is seen at the same 
time, but in reality they are different realities arising at different 
moments. Do we realize this? It seems to us that there are hearing and 
thinking of the meaning of what is heard at the same time but they are 
different realities. When we do not clearly distinguish between 
different realities, can we say that any reality is clearly 
understood? If there is still doubt it is evident that paññå is weak. 
It is beneficial to realize what one does not know yet.
Ignorance and doubt can only be very gradually eliminated through the 
development of paññå which directly knows nåma and rúpa. We may not be 
aware of one object at a time yet, there may be a notion of self who 
is watching realities. When there is an idea of "watching" we are not 
on the right path. Realities such as hardness or sound appear already, 
because of their own conditions. They can be studied with mindfulness 
which also arises because of its own conditions, namely, as we have 
seen, listening to the Dhamma and considering it. When we remember 
that the realities which appear one at a time have to be studied in 
order to have more understanding of them, there will be less worry 
about the frequency of sati. If one erroneously believes that nåma and 
rúpa are known already there is no development of paññå. When there is 
right mindfulness realities appear one at a time and there is no self 
who is watching.
If there cannot be awareness of all kinds of nåma and rúpa which 
appear in our daily life, no matter whether we are busy or agitated, 
we will not really know ourselves. If we think that we have to be 
relaxed first we limit the objects of awareness.
The development of paññå should be very natural. There should be no 
excitement about awareness, no thoughts about its frequency or 
acuteness. Is there still doubt about the reality which appears now? 
If there is awareness doubt can gradually be eliminated. If one 
believes that one has to calm down first before there can be awareness 
there cannot be awareness of whatever reality naturally appears. If 
the development of paññå is not natural one hinders its development.
If you are inclined to concentrate on breathing when you are agitated 
or have aversion, it would be very helpful if you could be aware of 
realities appearing at such moments. Are there not akusala cittas and 
should these realities not be known? When you wish to become relaxed 
through concentration on breathing is there no attachment? It is a 
reality and it can be object of mindfulness. Are there not different 
feelings: pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling and indifferent 
feeling? These can be object of mindfulness. If there can be awareness 
when you feel tense you can find out that there are nåmas and rúpas at 
such moments. Insight can only be developed if there is mindfulness of 
any reality which appears. If you believe that there cannot be 
awareness of aversion this reality will not be known as only a nåma, 
arising because of conditions. If there can be awareness in your daily 
life you will start to know yourself. You will be able to find out 
whether concentration on breathing is beneficial or not, whether it 
helps you to develop right understanding or not.
When there are many akusala cittas we may be inclined to look for a 
way to eliminate them quickly. Those who think that they want to apply 
themselves to samatha in order to have less akusala cittas, should 
find out whether they really have accumulations to develop samatha and 
whether the circumstances of their lives are such that the conditions 
which are necessary for its development can be fulfilled. It is 
important to know which cause brings which effect in life. If samatha 
is developed in the right way and jhåna can be attained, there will be 
the temporary elimination of defilements. If jhånacitta can arise 
shortly before dying there will be a happy rebirth in a higher plane 
of existence. However, the development of jhåna, as we have seen, is 
extremely difficult and very few people can do it. One may take for 
jhåna what is merely an unusual experience, not jhåna. Even if one 
develops samatha in the right way and one attains jhåna, one still has 
to develop insight in order to become detached from the concept of 
self and in order that all latent tendencies of defilements can be 
eradicated. Jhåna can lead to a happy rebirth, but vipassanå can lead 
to the end of birth, to the end of dukkha. The growth of insight 
knowledge cannot be forced, it has to be developed stage by stage.
We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saîåyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings 
on Sense, Second Fifty, Chapter III, § 74, Sick) that the Buddha 
visited a sick monk, who said that he did not understand the meaning 
of the purity of life in the Dhamma taught by the Buddha. When the 
Buddha asked him in what sense he understood it, he answered:

"Passion and the destruction of passion, lord,-that is what I 
understand to be the Dhamma taught by the Exalted One."
"Well said, monk! Well said! Well indeed do you understand the meaning 
of the Dhamma taught by me. Indeed it means passion and the 
destruction of passion.
Now what think you, monk? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"
"Impermanent, lord."
"Is the ear¤nose¤tongue¤body¤is mind permanent or impermanent?"
"Impermanent, lord."
"And what is impermanent, is that happiness or dukkha (suffering)?"
"Dukkha, lord."
"And what is impermanent, dukkha, by nature changeable,-is it proper 
to regard that as `This is mine. I am this. This is myself'?" 
"No, indeed, lord."
"If he sees thus, the well-taught ariyan disciple is repelled by the 
eye, the ear, the tongue¤so that he realizes `For life in these 
conditions there is no hereafter.'" 
`Thus spoke the Exalted One. And that monk was delighted and welcomed 
the words of the Exalted One. Moreover, when this discourse was 
uttered, in that monk arose the pure and flawless eye of the Dhamma, 
(so that he saw) "Whatsoever is of a nature to arise, all that is of a 
nature to cease."` 

For the sick monk the four necessary conditions for enlightenment were 
fulfilled: he had met the right person, he had listened to the Dhamma 
which was explained to him, he had wisely considered it and he had 
developed right understanding of realities. Should we be surprised 
that the Buddha, in order to show the way to the destruction of 
passion, first asked: "Is the eye permanent or impermanent?". And the 
same for the other doorways? People who wish to get rid of passion 
quickly may wonder whether they should suppress it, rather than 
develop understanding of realities appearing through the six doors. 
The development of under-standing seems to be a long way to get rid of 
passion. However, the Buddha showed cause and effect. There cannot be 
the destruction of passion without there being first the eradication 
of the wrong view of self through awareness of all realities which 
appear. When right understanding of nåma and rúpa has been developed 
they can be realized as impermanent and not self. This is the only way 
that leads to detachment from the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, 
the body, the mind, to detachment from all realities. Realities 
appearing through the six doors are explained in the Tipiìaka time and 
again, and whenever we read about this we can be reminded to be aware 
right at that moment. Are there not phenomena appearing through the 
six doors all the time? We should not be forgetful of them so that the 
way leading to enlightenment can be realized. 
With mettå, 		
Nina van Gorkom






	

						
						Tokyo
						June 15								
1971 		Dear Mr. G.,

You found it difficult to be aware while doing complicated things. I 
will quote from your letter:

`When I do things which can be performed automatically, like shaving, 
eating and walking, there can be awareness. But when I do complicated 
things like remembering a combination of numbers in order to open a 
safe, there cannot be awareness. I find that a special effort is 
needed for awareness of nåma and rúpa. While I have to exert myself to 
do complicated things I have no energy left for awareness. When I, for 
example, study a foreign language and I make an effort to memorize the 
words, I exclude all other things from my mind. At such moments I 
could not be aware.'

Shaving, walking, eating, opening a safe, all these things we can do 
because there are conditions to be able to do them. If you had not 
been taught you would not know how to open a safe. Remembering 
something is nåma, arising because of conditions. If we forget 
something, that also depends on conditions. The more we understand 
that realities are only nåma and rúpa, arising because of their own 
conditions, the less will there be hindrances to awareness. Realities 
such as visible object, hardness or feeling arise already because of 
their own conditions and you can begin to consider their different 
characteristics. You should not think of having to make an effort for 
sati because then there is still a notion of self who is aware. Sati 
can arise naturally in your daily life. When there is the study with 
awareness of one reality at a time there is a beginning of 
understanding. One should not try to hold on to realities in order to 
study them, because they do not stay. 
We believe that realities are the way we experience them, but in fact 
we experience them in a distorted way. It seems to us that realities 
such as hardness or visible object stay because their arising and 
falling away has not been realized yet. Their impermanence cannot be 
realized so long as paññå has not yet been developed to that stage. We 
know in theory that there is no self, but we still cling to the idea 
of self who is aware. We may take energy or effort for self. Effort or 
energy (viriya) is a cetasika, a mental factor which arises with many 
cittas, though not with each type. It arises with the citta and falls 
away together with it. When it accompanies kusala citta it is kusala 
and when it accompanies akusala citta it is akusala. There is no self 
who can exert control over effort, who can cause it to be kusala. When 
there is right awareness of a nåma or rúpa which appears through one 
of the six doors, there is already right effort accompanying the 
kusala citta. We do not have to try or to think of effort. When there 
is still wrong view, we may think that we cannot be aware while doing 
complicated things. We may think that at such moments awareness is 
more difficult than when we are walking or doing things which do not 
require much attention. In reality there is no difference. If one 
believes that there is a difference, one does not know what right 
awareness is. If there is less of a preconceived idea that in 
particular situations awareness is impossible, there can be awareness 
also while doing complicated things. We may be absorbed in what we are 
doing, but that doesn't matter. Being absorbed is a reality, it can be 
known as only a type of nåma. Realities appear already because of 
their own conditions, and gradually we can learn to study their 
characteristics. 
Misunderstandings are bound to arise as to what awareness really is 
and because of these misunderstandings people think that it is 
impossible to be aware in daily life. Someone wrote, for instance, 
that awareness is the same as keeping oneself under constant 
observation. We should observe ourselves in action, he said, and this 
can be done quite simply by asking oneself, "What am I doing?". He 
thought that in this way we learn to be aware of what we are doing and 
that this constitutes awareness. 
The word awareness in conventional language has a meaning which is 
different from awareness, sati, of the Eightfold Path. When we ask 
ourselves, "What am I doing?", what is the reality at that moment? 
There are many types of citta which think at such moments. If we do 
not realize that it is nåma which thinks while we ask ourselves, "What 
am I doing?", the wrong view of self will not be eradicated. There is 
only thinking about the self who is performing different actions. 
There is no sati of the Eightfold Path, there is no development of 
understanding of the different characteristics of nåma and rúpa. When 
we are reading and we answer the question, "What am I doing?", with, 
"I am reading", without development of understanding, we live only in 
the world of conventional truth. We will continue to be ignorant of 
the absolute truth, the truth about nåma and rúpa. When we are 
reading, is there not the nåma which experiences visible object, is 
there not the rúpa which is visible object, is there not the nåma 
which thinks about the meaning of what is read, and should these 
realities not be known? It is the same when we are walking, talking or 
eating, if we only know "I am walking, talking and eating", it is not 
at all helpful for the development of paññå. There is still the wrong 
view of self. While we are walking, talking and eating there are nåma 
and rúpa appearing through the six doors, and right understanding can 
be developed of them. Some people believe that they have to slow down 
all their movements in order to be able to be aware. Is there desire 
for awareness? If one is not aware naturally in one's daily life paññå 
cannot develop. The "Satipaììhåna sutta" (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 
10) reminds us to be aware in our daily life, no matter what we are 
doing. 
We read under the section of mindfulness of the body, regarding the 
postures:

`And again, monks, a monk, when he is walking, comprehends, "I am 
walking"; or when he is standing still, comprehends, "I am standing 
still"; or when he is sitting down, comprehends, "I am sitting down"; 
or when he is lying down, comprehends, "I am lying down". So that 
however his body is disposed he comprehends that it is like that. Thus 
he fares along contemplating the body in the body internally, or he 
fares along contemplating the body in the body externally, or he fares 
along contemplating the body in the body internally and externally...'

The commentary to this sutta, the "Papañcasúdani"[6] explains the words, 
"When he is going, a monk understands `I am going' " as follows:

`In this matter of going, readily do dogs, jackals and the like, know 
when they move on that they are moving. But this instruction on the 
modes of deportment was not given concerning similar awareness, 
because awareness of that sort belonging to animals does not shed the 
belief in a living being, does not knock out the perception of a soul 
and neither becomes a subject of meditation nor the development of 
satipaììhåna.' 

The commentary explains that there is no living being. There is going 
on account of the diffusion of the process of oscillation (motion) 
born of mental activity. There are only nåma and rúpa which arise 
because of conditions. When the monk is walking, standing, sitting or 
lying down, he contemplates the body in the body, he does not take the 
body for self. He is mindful of the realities which appear. 
We read in the following section of the sutta, the section on clear 
comprehension:

`And again, monks, a monk when he is setting out or returning is one 
acting in a clearly conscious way; when he is looking in front or 
looking around¤when he has bent in or stretched out (his arm)...when 
he is carrying his outer cloak, bowl and robe¤when he is obeying the 
calls of nature¤when he is walking, standing, sitting, asleep, awake, 
talking, silent, he is one acting in a clearly conscious way. 
Thus he fares along contemplating the body in the body 
internally...externally¤internally and externally¤'

If one thinks of the body as a "whole" the arising and falling away of 
rúpas cannot be realized and one will continue to cling to the idea of 
"my body". During all one's activities there can be the development of 
right understanding, so that wrong view can be eradicated. 
Sati is not: observing oneself in action. Sati arises with each 
"beautiful" (sobhana) citta and its function is being non-forgetful of 
what is wholesome. Sati is different from the cetasika saññå, 
remembrance or "perception", which arises with each citta. Saññå 
recognizes or "marks" the object, so that it can be recognized later 
on. Sati of the Eightfold Path is mindful of the reality which 
presents itself at the present moment, and then right under-standing 
of it can be developed. We do not have to think of sati, it arises 
when there are conditions for it. When right understanding of a 
reality which presents itself is being developed, there is also sati 
which is mindful, non-forgetful, of that reality. For example, when 
the characteristic of hardness appears and it is realized as a kind of 
rúpa, it is evident that there is sati. When we think, "I am eating" 
and we are not aware of different nåmas and rúpas which appear, there 
is a concept of self who is eating. When right understanding is 
developed the "self" is broken up into different nåma-elements and 
rúpa-elements. In order that right under-standing can be developed 
there should be mindfulness of a characteristic of nåma or rúpa, not 
mindfulness without knowing anything.
If one thinks that sati means keeping oneself under constant 
observation, one is bound to believe that it is impossible to be aware 
while doing things which require special attention. One may be urged 
to make special efforts in order to create conditions for a great deal 
of sati. Any speculation about creating conditions for the arising of 
sati distracts from the study of the reality appearing right at this 
moment. It is thinking of the future instead of being aware of 
aversion now, seeing now, thinking now. There is clinging to an idea 
of self who can control awareness, and in that way there will not be 
detachment from the concept of self.
If we understand more clearly that our life consists of nåma and rúpa 
which arise because of conditions, we will be less absorbed in the 
idea of self while we do complicated things. Also at such moments 
there are only nåma and rúpa. We may believe that while we are talking 
there cannot be awareness, since we have to think about what we are 
saying. There is sound and can there not be awareness of it? It is 
citta, not self, which thinks about what we are going to say and which 
conditions sound. There can be awareness of realities in between 
thinking. I noticed that while I am writing the Chinese script 
(Kanji), it is possible to hear other people talking or to think of 
other things. This shows that there are many different types of cittas 
which succeed one another so rapidly that it seems that they occur all 
at the same time. Since there can be hearing or thinking in between 
the writing of Kanji, there can also be awareness in between.
You mentioned that you could not be aware while learning a foreign 
language. Learning a foreign language can teach us about reality. When 
we learn a foreign language such as Japanese we cannot in the 
beginning translate quickly. Later on we acquire skill and it seems 
that we do it automatically. When we hear a Japanese word we 
immediately know the meaning, it seems that hearing and knowing the 
meaning occur at the same time. However, we know that they are 
different moments of citta. Also when we hear words spoken in our own 
language there is hearing and then "translating" going on, we 
interpret the sounds so that we understand the meaning. The process of 
translation goes on very rapidly, it goes on the whole day. When there 
is seeing, visible object is experienced, but immediately we translate 
what we see, we interpret it, and then we discern people and things. 
If we consider the process of translation we can understand more 
clearly that seeing and hearing are different from thinking. The 
moments that we do not translate seeing and hearing can be studied. 
Thus, no matter whether you learn a foreign language or whether you 
are merely thinking after seeing or hearing, there is translating 
going on time and again. No matter what we do, there are nåma and 
rúpa, and sometimes sati can arise and be aware of them. We cannot 
control the cittas which arise. They arise and perform their own 
functions. So long as we believe that we can create conditions for the 
arising of sati, the right awareness will not arise. One may believe 
that there is sati when there is only ignorance of realities. 
Awareness can arise if there are conditions for it. The conditions are 
listening to the Dhamma and considering it. We may believe that we 
have listened and considered enough, but, when there are still 
misunderstandings about the Eightfold Path it is evident that our 
listening and considering have not been enough. We should not assume 
too soon that we studied enough. We have accumulated ignorance for 
aeons and therefore it will take aeons before it can be eradicated. 
This should not discourage us, but we should continue to listen, to 
read and to study, and we should consider thoroughly what we learnt. 
We should consider the Dhamma with regard to our own experiences in 
daily life.
Råhula, the Buddha's son, attained arahatship when he was only twenty 
years old. For him the conditions necessary for enlightenment were 
fulfilled: he associated with the right person, the Buddha, he 
listened to the Dhamma, he considered it and he developed the 
Eightfold Path. We read in the Middle Length Sayings (II, no. 62, 
"Greater Discourse on an Exhortation to Råhula") that Råhula asked the 
Buddha how mindfulness of breathing, when it is developed and made 
much of, is of great fruit, of great advantage. The Buddha did not 
speak immediately about mindfulness of breathing, he first taught 
Råhula about the elements of solidity, cohesion, heat, motion and 
space. No matter whether these elements are internal or external, they 
should not be taken for self. The Buddha then said to Råhula:

`Develop the mind-development that is like the earth, Råhula. For, 
from developing the mind-development that is like the earth, Råhula, 
agreeable and disagreeable sensory impressions that have arisen, 
taking hold of your thought, will not persist.'

In the same way the Buddha told Råhula to develop the mind- 
development that is like water, fire, wind and space (air). What are 
we doing when there are agreeable or disagreeable sense-impressions 
that take hold of us? Do we take them for self, or can we realize them 
as only elements? Råhula had to be mindful of all realities appearing 
through the six doors in order to see them as only elements.
Further on we read that the Buddha encouraged Råhula to the 
development of lovingkindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, 
equanimity, the contemplation of the foul and the perception of 
impermanence. It was only after the Buddha had taught all this to 
Råhula that he spoke about mindfulness of breathing. Råhula did not 
apply himself to this subject without knowing anything. While he 
applied himself to mindfulness of breathing he realized the true 
nature of all nåmas and rúpas appearing through the six doors. He had 
accumulated great wisdom and therefore he was able to develop 
mindfulness of breathing so that it was of great fruit, of great 
advantage. The Buddha said that if it was developed in that way the 
final in-breaths and out-breaths too are known as they cease, they are 
not unknown.
The Buddha taught Råhula about the eye, visible object and 
seeing-consciousness, about all realities which appear through the six 
doors. He taught Råhula until he attained arahatship. We read in the 
Kindred Sayings ( IV, Saîåyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on Sense, 
Third Fifty, Chapter II, § 121, Råhula) that it occurred to the 
Buddha, while he was near Såvatthí, at the Jeta Grove, that Råhula was 
ripe for the attainment of arahatship. He wanted to give Råhula the 
last teachings and he said to him that they would go to Dark Wood. We 
read:

`Now at that time countless thousands of devas were following the 
Exalted One, thinking: "Today the Exalted One will give the venerable 
Råhula the last teachings for the destruction of the åsavas."
So the Exalted One plunged into the depths of Dark Wood and sat down 
at the foot of a certain tree on the seat prepared for him. And the 
venerable Råhula, saluting the Exalted One, sat down also at one side. 
As he thus sat the Exalted One said to the venerable Råhula:
"Now what do you think, Råhula? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"
"Impermanent, lord."
"What is impermanent is that happiness or dukkha?"
"Dukkha, lord."
"Now what is impermanent, woeful, by nature changeable-is it fitting 
to regard that as `This is mine. This am I. This is myself?' "
"Surely not, lord." 
(The same is said about the other phenomena appearing through the 
sense-doors and through the mind-door.)
Thus spoke the Exalted One. And the venerable Råhula was delighted 
with the words of the Exalted One and welcomed them. And when this 
instruction was given, the venerable Råhula's heart was freed from the 
åsavas without grasping. And in those countless devas arose the pure 
and spotless eye of the Dhamma, so that they knew: "Whatsoever is of a 
nature to arise, all that is of a nature to cease." ` 

When we read this sutta we may find it to be a repetition of so many 
suttas. We may read it countless times, but we may only have 
theoretical understanding of the truth. One day the truth may be 
realized but this depends on the degree of the development of paññå. 
Is the eye permanent or impermanent? Is what is impermanent happiness 
or dukkha? Should we take it for self? Are the other realities 
permanent or impermanent? The Buddha spoke about all the realities 
which appear now. If we do not yet have a keen understanding of seeing 
and visible object which appear now, at this moment, if we cannot yet 
distinguish between the different characteristics of nåma and of rúpa 
which appear now, their arising and falling away cannot be realized. 
When the Buddha asked Råhula about the true nature of realities, would 
Råhula only have been thinking about nåma and rúpa, or did he at that 
moment realize their true nature? We know the answer. Råhula was 
mindful of realities appearing through the six doors, and thus his 
wisdom could be fully developed. Otherwise he could not have attained 
arahatship.


With mettå
Nina van Gorkom 





	


						Tokyo
						July 15								
19 71 		Dear Mr. G.,

You wrote: "When I am aware of nåma and rúpa, I find that their 
appearance is not always followed by wisdom about them."
We are bound to have doubts about the characteristic of sati and the 
characteristic of paññå. Objects are experienced time and again 
without sati. We are absorbed in pleasant objects and we have aversion 
towards unpleasant objects; there are akusala cittas and there is no 
mindfulness of realities. Sometimes there can be conditions for 
awareness and then it arises just for a short moment. There can be 
"study" with awareness of realities, such as hardness which appears or 
feeling which presents itself. When there is the "study" of a 
characteristic of nåma or rúpa, there is a beginning of the 
development of paññå, although paññå is still weak. When you say that 
the appearance of nåma and rúpa is not always followed by paññå you 
assume that there is first aware-ness and that paññå follows later on. 
There can be sati without there being paññå at that moment, but then 
there is no development of the Eightfold Path. Sati accompanies each 
kusala citta and there are many levels of sati. When there is 
awareness of a characteristic of nåma or rúpa there is development of 
understanding of that characteristic right at that moment. Paññå of 
the Eightfold Path is not thinking about realities which have fallen 
away already.
Right awareness of the Eightfold Path is difficult. There has to be 
awareness of one nåma or rúpa, of one object at a time. Do realities 
appear one at a time? It seems that there can be seeing and hearing or 
seeing and thinking at the same time. We may have begun to study what 
appears through the eyes, visible object, but is the characteristic of 
seeing known already? The nåma which sees seems to be hidden, we 
cannot grasp it, it seems to escape us. It is only paññå which can 
know nåma and rúpa as they are. Don't we take the study of realities 
for self? Then we are on the wrong way and nåma and rúpa will not be 
known as they are. We have an idea that they escape us. So long as we 
are not sotåpanna we have to continue to take into account that we 
have wrong view and that we follow the wrong practice.
The development of the Eightfold Path is not different from developing 
understanding of the reality which appears right now. If there is 
awareness of visible object than that reality can be studied so that 
it can be known as only a rúpa. If seeing is not the object of 
awareness that reality cannot be studied and we should not try to be 
aware of it. It depends on paññå which types of realities are 
understood, it does not depend on us. When paññå grows there will be 
conditions that more types of realities will be known. There is 
hearing time and again, and we can learn that when there is hearing 
only sound is heard, that words cannot be heard. There is thinking 
when we distinguish different words and know their meaning. There can 
be a beginning of under-standing of different characteristics and this 
is the development of the Eightfold Path. We should not worry about 
the moments of sati and paññå, but we should remember our goal: the 
understanding of realities which appear now.
You wrote that when you do gymnastic exercises you can experience the 
difference between motion and seeing the motion.
When we speak about "seeing motion", what is the reality which can be 
experienced? What can be seen? Can motion be experienced through 
eyesense? When we use the word motion in conventional language we 
think of a whole situation, of people or things which move. We believe 
that we can see people and things move. Through eyes only colour or 
visible object is experienced, but seeing conditions thinking of 
people and things which move. If there were not the experience of 
visible object we could not think about concepts of people and things 
which move. Saññå, remembrance, is the condition that we know that 
there are people and things and that we can observe their movements. 
As regards motion, this is a kind of rúpa, the element of wind, which 
has the characteristic of motion or pressure. This type of rúpa can be 
experienced through the bodysense. It is different from what we mean 
by motion in conventional language.
We think of a person who moves his body, but actually there is no 
person and there is not a body which stays. The body consists of the 
four Great Elements of Earth (solidity), Water (cohesion), Fire 
(temperature) and Wind (motion), and of other types of rúpas. The 
rúpas of the body arise and then fall away immediately. There is no 
living being who goes, but it is citta which conditions the movement 
of the rúpas we call "our body".
There can be awareness of different realities which appear one at a 
time. Through eyes only visible object appears, through bodysense 
hardness, softness, heat, cold, motion or pressure can appear. A 
concept of the whole body or of a person is not a reality, but the 
thinking of it is real, it is nåma. We may notice that there is 
thinking and just be satisfied to know that. We call it "thinking", 
but do we have right understanding of it? When there is thinking there 
are many different types of cittas, succeeding one another. Sometimes 
there are kusala cittas, but most of the time there are akusala cittas 
when we are thinking, cittas rooted in lobha, dosa and moha. We are 
inclined to take the different moments of thinking as a "whole", 
thinking seems to last. Do we cling to an idea of self who thinks? If 
we learn to be aware of nåma and rúpa as they present themselves one 
at a time, the self will begin to disintegrate.
Someone asked me: "How can we ever know different realities which 
succeed one another so quickly? Do we not have to be extremely fast?"
There is no self who knows realities, it is paññå which is able to 
know them. If we think that we have to be fast we cling to a concept 
of self and this hinders the development of right understanding. When 
there are conditions for the arising of awareness paññå will gradually 
develop and it will perform its function. We should consider the 
definition of paññå or non-delusion given in the Visuddhimagga (XIV, 
143):

`Non-delusion has the characteristic of penetrating things according 
to their individual essences, or it has the characteristic of sure 
penetration, like the penetration of an arrow shot by a skilful 
archer. Its function is to illuminate the objective field, like a 
lamp. It is manifested as non-bewilderment, like a guide in a 
forest....'

When paññå has been developed it is as fast as an arrow shot by a 
skilful archer, and it is sure in its penetration of the true nature 
of realities. It illuminates the object which is experienced so that 
it is known as it really is. It is paññå, not self, which is so keen 
that it knows precisely the reality which appears as it is.
It is important to know when there is clinging to awareness, it may be 
so subtle that we do not notice it. The best cure is studying the 
reality which appears right now. Even clinging to awareness can be 
realized as a type of nåma. It arises because we have accumulated 
clinging.
When paññå has not been developed we have doubt about all the 
realities which appear. We do not know precisely when there is kusala 
citta, when akusala citta and when vipåka-citta, citta which is the 
result of kamma. Someone had a question about the nature of 
vipåka-citta: "Can we know when vipåka-citta is kusala vipåka, the 
result of kusala kamma, and when akusala vipåka, the result of akusala 
kamma? Can we know when the object which vipåka-citta experiences is a 
pleasant object and when an unpleasant object?"
We cannot always know whether an object is pleasant or unpleasant. 
Moreover, we may take for pleasant what is not pleasant, since we are 
attached to particular things with which we are familiar. When we see 
something there is visible object which impinges on the eyesense. 
Seeing is vipåka-citta and it experiences only visible object. It does 
not experience things such as a house or a tree. Those are concepts 
which are experienced by cittas arising in a mind-door process. There 
are sense-door processes and mind-door processes succeeding one 
another very quickly. When we are looking at something there are 
eye-door processes and mind-door processes. Visible object impinges on 
the eye-door time and again and it is hard to tell when visible object 
which is pleasant and when visible object which is unpleasant impinges 
on the eyesense. It is difficult to know which of the many moments of 
seeing and hearing are kusala vipåka and which akusala vipåka. Akusala 
vipåka and kusala vipåka arise in different processes of citta but 
cittas succeed one another so quickly that what are in fact countless 
cittas seem to be one moment.
We do not clearly distinguish between different realities, we "join" 
them together. When we think of vipåka, we usually think of a whole 
situation. For example we think that being in a swimmingpool is kusala 
vipåka and we cling to this situation. When I was swimming there was 
at one moment the experience of a pleasant object through the 
bodysense, at another moment an unpleasant object. When we enjoy doing 
something like swim-ming, we do not always notice it when the object 
which is experienced is unpleasant. The object is unpleasant when, for 
example, the temperature of the water is just a little too cold. We 
are ignorant of the realities which appear one at a time. Swimmingpool 
is not a reality which can be directly experienced. Phenomena such as 
cold, softness, attachment or aversion are realities which can be 
directly experienced when they present themselves one at a time.
Vipåka is such a short moment, why should we try to find out whether 
it is kusala vipåka or akusala vipåka? When the vipåka has already 
fallen away we continue to think about it. We find it so important 
whether there is kusala vipåka or akusala vipåka in our life. We 
regret the days when there is a great deal of akusala vipåka and we 
think of a "self" who has to receive it. Vipåka is the result of 
kamma. It arises just for a moment and then it falls away. When we 
hear unpleasant words the experience of sound is a moment of vipåka 
and it falls away immediately. At the moment of hearing we do not know 
the meaning of the words yet. When we know the meaning there is 
thinking, and then there are usually akusala cittas which think with 
aversion about those words. We cannot change what has happened, but 
what can be done is the development of right understanding of 
realities. It is essential to know when there is kusala citta, when 
akusala citta and when vipåka-citta, but we should not try to find out 
whether the vipåka was kusala vipåka or akusala vipåka. Seeing, for 
example, is vipåka and after it has fallen away there are kusala 
cittas or akusala cittas, but most of the time there are akusala 
cittas. We are attached to visible object or we have aversion towards 
it. It is important to know these types of akusala cittas which arise 
after the vipåka-citta.
Someone asked me whether it is possible to have kusala cittas after 
akusala vipåka and akusala cittas after kusala vipåka.
There can be kusala cittas after akusala vipåka and akusala cittas 
after kusala vipåka, because the conditions for these different types 
of cittas are entirely different. Vipåka-citta is the result of kamma, 
a deed committed in the past. Akusala cittas and kusala cittas are 
conditioned by our accumulations of akusala and kusala.
I will give an example of an unpleasant object after the experience of 
which there can be different types of citta, kusala citta or akusala 
citta, depending on one's accumulations. If one sees a dead cat, 
different types of citta may arise on account of what is seen. We may 
think of the dead cat without awareness of realities and we may take 
the cat for "something" which stays. We may have aversion towards it. 
What is the dead cat? When we are looking there is visible object, 
when we touch it there is hardness or softness. Through the nose odour 
presents itself. It is because of saññå, remembrance, that a "whole", 
the dead cat, is remembered. In reality there is no dead cat, there 
are only different elements arising and falling away. Someone who has 
developed calm may have kusala cittas with calm when he sees a dead 
cat. He may take it as a meditation subject, the foulness of the body. 
He may remember that also his own body is subject to decay. If he has 
accumulated skill for jhåna, jhåna can be attained with this subject. 
Someone who develops vipassanå can be reminded of the true nature of 
realities, their nature of impermanence and anattå. He is aware of 
whatever nåma or rúpa presents itself at that moment in order to know 
realities as they are. He may even at that moment attain enlightenment.
It all depends on one's accumulations whether there are, after having 
seen a foul object, akusala cittas, mahå-kusala citta (kusala cittas 
of the sense-sphere), jhåna-cittas or lokuttara cittas. The 
"cemetery-meditations" are included in the "Applications of 
Mindfulness", under the section of "Mindfulness of the Body". We read 
in the "Satipaììhåna-sutta" (Middle Length Sayings I, no. 10):

`And again, monks, as a monk might see a body thrown aside in a 
cemetery, dead for one day or for two days or for three days, swollen, 
discoloured, decomposing; he focuses on this body itself*, thinking: 
"This body, too, is of a similar nature, a similar constitution, it 
has not got past that (state of things)."¤It is thus too, monks, that 
a monk fares along contemplating the body in the body.' 

This passage can be applied by all who develop vipassanå, no matter 
whether they have first developed the "cemetery-meditations" as a 
meditation subject of samatha or not. What we take for our body are 
only elements which are each moment subject to decay. We should 
"contemplate the body in the body", we should not take it for 
something which stays, for "self".
In the Visuddhimagga (I, 55) we read about the monk Mahå Tissa who met 
a woman when he was walking in the village. When she was smiling he 
saw her teeth and attained arahatship. We read:

It seems that while the Elder was going on his way from Cetiyapabbata 
to Anurådhapura for alms, a certain daughter-in-law of a clan, who had 
quarrelled with her husband and had set out early from Anurådhapura 
all dressed up and tricked out like a celestial nymph to go to her 
relatives' home, saw him on the road, and being low-minded, she 
laughed a loud laugh. (Wondering) "What is that?", the Elder looked 
up, and finding in the bones of her teeth the perception of foulness 
(ugliness), he reached arahatship. Hence it was said:

`He saw the bones that were her teeth,
And kept in mind his first perception;
And standing on that very spot
The Elder became an arahat.'

But her husband who was going after her saw the Elder and
asked, "Venerable sir, did you by any chance see a 
woman?" The Elder told him:

"Whether it was a man or woman
That went by I noticed not;
But only that on this high road
There goes a group of bones." 

Did you note the Elder's answer? Was he attached to concepts such as 
"man", "woman"? Did he take what he perceived for self? He saw the 
body in the body; he was aware of realities. Because of his 
accumulated wisdom he did not take what he saw for a being, a "self 
"--he only saw a group of bones, something foul. How often do we take 
for beautiful what is foul. He realized nåma and rúpa as they are and 
attained arahatship. 
Those who have developed both samatha and vipassanå may, when they 
have seen something foul, have jhånacittas which have foulness as 
their object. It depends on one's accumulations whether or not 
jhånacittas arise. But in order to know things as they are, one should 
see the body in the body, feelings in the feelings, citta in citta, 
dhamma in dhamma. In other words, one should realize the true nature 
of the reality which appears at this moment.
The Visuddhimagga explains, just before the passage about Mahå Tissa, 
the virtue of restraint of the faculties (indriya-saóvara-síla). There 
is this kind of síla when there is mindfulness of realities appearing 
through the six doors. When there is mindfulness and understanding of 
the objects experienced through the six doors these doors are 
"guarded" against akusala. The Visuddhimagga states: "He apprehends 
what is really there¤"
Do we "apprehend what is really there", or do we have wrong view? Do 
we take realities for permanent and for self instead of being mindful 
of them? We do not have to refrain from thinking about concepts but 
there can be less clinging to them. When we think of concepts such as 
"man" or "woman" we can remember that thinking is a reality which can 
be object of mindfulness. It is only a kind of nåma arising because of 
conditions, not self. It is because of saññå that we remember that 
this is a man and that a woman. Whatever reality is the object of 
mindfulness depends on sati, not on a self. The Elder, because of his 
accumulations, did not notice a woman, but there was the perception of 
foulness and then he realized things as they are. In that way he was 
not absorbed in the idea of a woman, akusala cittas did not arise on 
account of what was seen. However, even the thinking of a woman who 
smiles can be the object of awareness, and after that enlightenment 
can be attained if paññå has been developed to that extent. Any kind 
of reality can be the object of sati and we should not try to select 
particular objects. If we select particular objects we will not see 
things as they are, as realities which arise because of their own 
conditions and which are beyond control, anattå.
The Visuddhimagga (I, 56) continues after the passage about Mahå Tissa 
with the explanation of the virtue of restraint of the faculties:

`¤if he, if that person, left the eye faculty unguarded, remained with 
the eye-door unclosed by the door-panel of mindfulness, these states 
of covetousness, etc. might invade, might pursue, might threaten, him. 
He enters upon the way of its restraint: he enters upon the way of 
closing that eye faculty by the door-panel of mindfulness. It is the 
same one of whom it is said he guards the eye faculty, undertakes the 
restraint of the eye faculty.'

This does not mean that we should avoid seeing or hearing, there are 
conditions for the arising of these realities. If the doorways are 
unguarded akusala cittas arise on account of what is experienced. We 
take the object for permanent or for self, we do not know what is 
really there. When there is, after seeing, hearing or the experiences 
through the other doors, the development of understanding, the doors 
are guarded.


With mettå
	
Nina van Gorkom


-----

[1]The indrayas or faculties which have to be developed are: faith, 
energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom.
[2]With the least attainment.
[3]At the moment of access-concentration the citta is not yet 
jhåna-citta, but the hindrances are temporarily suppressed.
[4]See the Mahå-satipaììhåna sutta (Dígha Nikåya, Dialogues 11, no. 22.
[5]Rúpa-jhånas can be counted as four stages or as five stages. In the 
first and second stage of jhåna of the "fourfold system" and in the 
third second and third stage of the "five-fold system" píti arises. It 
is abondoned in the higher stages of jhåna.
[6]Translated in The Way of Mindfulness by Soma Thera, B.P.S. Kandy, Sri 
Lanka.
