\input texinfo
@c $Id: paccents.texi,v 1.2 2010/08/09 19:01:16 alan Exp alan $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename PA.info
@settitle Pāli Accents
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header 
@copying
 

First published by Zolag July 2010

Revision 1.00

$Id: paccents.texi,v 1.2 2010/08/09 19:01:16 alan Exp alan $


@end copying

@titlepage
@title Pāli Accents


@author Alan Weller
@c The following two commands
@c start the copyright page.

@insertcopying

@end titlepage


@ifnottex

by Alan Weller

Updated 9/08/10

$Id: paccents.texi,v 1.2 2010/08/09 19:01:16 alan Exp alan $

___________________________________________________________________

@end ifnottex












@unnumberedsec Getting Pāli accents in Text and on the Web
@unnumberedsubsec Introduction
by Alan Weller 

www.zolag.co.uk 

This article pertains to the above website and is intended to help get correct Pāli accents with articles and books.
Over the years the methods of getting correct accents in text and on the web has changed. Zolag's current method is to use a modern unicode font. The examples below show all of the  characters currently in use:


ā
ī
ṇ
ñ
ū
ṭ
ṅ
ḷ
Ñ
Ā
ṁ
ṣ
ṃ
ḍ

However before this there were three main ways we used.

@unnumberedsubsec Special Fonts and Latex
The table shows two ways we have used to get Pāli characters as in the left column. 

@enumerate
@item
By using a specially modified font eg pCharter. This translates typed characters in the 2nd column (available in most font sets ) to the first. This font was then used in Openoffice.

@item
For printed documents, by using Latex. Latex codes in the last column get the characters in the first column. 

OpenOffice can export to Latex. If a document is written using the pCharter font, then it is converted to Latex by exporting in OpenOffice and then doing a search and replace on 3rd column with fourth column. This is because OpenOffice will produce Latex codes as in the third column. Sounds complicated-it is! pCharter font Normal font Latex code Latex code to get to get to get 1st column 2nd column.
@end enumerate
@multitable @columnfractions .15 .15 .15 .15
@headitem Pcharter font @tab Standard font @tab Latex code to get 2nd
column @tab Latex code to get first column

@item ā
@tab å
@tab \aa
@tab \=a

@item ṇ 
@tab ù 
@tab \`u
@tab \d n

@item ñ
@tab ñ
@tab \~n
@tab \~n

@item ṅ
@tab ò
@tab \`o
@tab \.n

@item ī
@tab í
@tab \'i
@tab \=\ i@{@}
brackets to get space after i

@item ṭ
@tab ì
@tab \`i
@tab \d t

@item ū
@tab ú
@tab \'u
@tab \=u

@item ḷ
@tab î
@tab \^i
@tab \d l

@item ṃ
@tab ÿ
@tab \"y
@tab \d m

@item ṁ
@tab ó
@tab \`m
@tab \.m


@end multitable


@unnumberedsubsec The Velthuis scheme

The scheme below taken from:
@itemize
@item
@url{http://www.cambodianbuddhist.org/english/website/Pāli/index.html} 
@end itemize

@noindent was  a better way of writing the text and displaying it on the web and still retain accent information. 

We have used this scheme on some web pages (html)

N.B There is no need for this now as the unicode font can be used for both text and htnl


“The Velthuis scheme: double the vowels, punctuate the consonants. This scheme was originally developed in 1991 by Frans Velthuis for use with his "devnag" Devanagari font, designed for the TEX typesetting system (@url{see http://www.ctan.org/}.)

Pāli and Sanskrit scholars have since adopted it as a standard technique in Internet correspondence (see, for example, the BUDDHA-L discussion group and the Journal of Buddhist Ethics). In the Velthuis scheme two basic rules are observed: 
Long vowels (those usually typeset with a macron (bar) above them) are doubled: aa ii uu 
For consonants, the diacritic mark precedes the letter it affects. Thus, the retroflex (cerebral) consonants (usually typeset with a dot underneath) are: .r .t .th .d .dh .n .m .s .l. The guttural nasals (m or n with a dot above) are represented by "m and "n . The palatal nasal (n with a tilde) is ~n. 
This scheme is precise, although it does take some getting used to: 
paa.naatipaataa verama.nii sikkhaa-pada.m samaadiyaami.”

@unnumberedsec Current Method of Typsetting

We now use the unicode font and texinfo to produce output in different formants for print and web.

Tip: Download the source of this document to get the unicode characters giving the Pāli accents

@bye

